*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 61077 ***









                      The King of Elfland's Daughter



                              Lord Dunsany





                           BALLANTINE BOOKS

                               NEW YORK



              First Ballantine Books edition: June, 1969



                           Printed in Canada



                        BALLANTINE BOOKS, INC.

                101 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003





                                  TO

                             LADY DUNSANY









                                Preface





I hope that no suggestion of any strange land that may be conveyed by

the title will scare readers away from this book; for, though some

chapters do indeed tell of Elfland, in the greater part of them there is

no more to be shown than the face of the fields we know, and ordinary

English woods and a common village and valley, a good twenty or

twenty-five miles from the border of Elfland.



                                                           LORD DUNSANY









                              _Contents_





         Preface



       I The Plan of the Parliament of Erl



      II Alveric Comes in Sight of the Elfin Mountains



     III The Magical Sword Meets Some of the Swords of Elfland



      IV Alveric Comes Back to Earth After Many Years



       V The Wisdom of the Parliament of Erl



      VI The Rune of the Elf King



     VII The Coming of the Troll



    VIII The Arrival of the Rune



      IX Lirazel Blows Away



       X The Ebbing of Elfland



      XI The Deep of the Woods



     XII The Unenchanted Plain



    XIII The Reticence of the Leather-Worker



     XIV The Quest for the Elfin Mountains



      XV The Retreat of the Elf King



     XVI Orion Hunts the Stag



    XVII The Unicorn Comes in the Starlight



   XVIII The Grey Tent in the Evening



     XIX Twelve Old Men Without Magic



      XX A Historical Fact



     XXI On the Verge of Earth



    XXII Orion Appoints a Whip



   XXIII Lurulu Watches the Restlessness



    XXIV Lurulu Speaks of Earth and the Ways of Men



     XXV Lirazel Remembers the Fields We Know



    XXVI The Horn of Alveric



   XXVII The Return of Lurulu



  XXVIII A Chapter on Unicorn-Hunting



    XXIX The Luring of the People of the Marshes



     XXX The Coming of Too Much Magic



    XXXI The Cursing of Elfin Things



   XXXII Lirazel Yearns for Earth



  XXXIII The Shining Line



   XXXIV The Last Great Rune









                               CHAPTER I



                  _The Plan of the Parliament of Erl_





In their ruddy jackets of leather that reached to their knees the men of

Erl appeared before their lord, the stately white-haired man in his long

red room. He leaned in his carven chair and heard their spokesman.



And thus their spokesman said.



"For seven hundred years the chiefs of your race have ruled us well; and

their deeds are remembered by the minor minstrels, living on yet in

their little tinkling songs. And yet the generations stream away, and

there is no new thing."



"What would you?" said the lord.



"We would be ruled by a magic lord," they said.



"So be it," said the lord. "It is five hundred years since my people

have spoken thus in parliament, and it shall always be as your

parliament saith. You have spoken. So be it."



And he raised his hand and blessed them and they went.



They went back to their ancient crafts, to the fitting of iron to the

hooves of horses, to working upon leather, to tending flowers, to

ministering to the rugged needs of Earth; they followed the ancient

ways, and looked for a new thing. But the old lord sent a word to his

eldest son, bidding him come before him.



And very soon the young man stood before him, in that same carven chair

from which he had not moved, where light, growing late, from high

windows, showed the aged eyes looking far into the future beyond that

old lord's time. And seated there he gave his son his commandment.



"Go forth," he said, "before these days of mine are over, and therefore

go in haste, and go from here eastwards and pass the fields we know,

till you see the lands that clearly pertain to faery; and cross their

boundary, which is made of twilight, and come to that palace that is

only told of in song."



"It is far from here," said the young man Alveric.



"Yes," answered he, "it is far."



"And further still," the young man said, "to return. For distances in

those fields are not as here."



"Even so," said his father.



"What do you bid me do," said the son, "when I come to that palace?"



And his father said: "To wed the King of Elfland's daughter."



The young man thought of her beauty and crown of ice, and the sweetness

that fabulous runes had told was hers. Songs were sung of her on wild

hills where tiny strawberries grew, at dusk and by early starlight, and

if one sought the singer no man was there. Sometimes only her name was

sung softly over and over. Her name was Lirazel.



She was a princess of the magic line. The gods had sent their shadows to

her christening, and the fairies too would have gone, but that they were

frightened to see on their dewy fields the long dark moving shadows of

the gods, so they stayed hidden in crowds of pale pink anemones, and

thence blessed Lirazel.



"My people demand a magic lord to rule over them. They have chosen

foolishly," the old lord said, "and only the Dark Ones that show not

their faces know all that this will bring: but we, who see not, follow

the ancient custom and do what our people in their parliament say. It

may be some spirit of wisdom they have not known may save them even yet.

Go then with your face turned towards that light that beats from

fairyland, and that faintly illumines the dusk between sunset and early

stars, and this shall guide you till you come to the frontier and have

passed the fields we know."



Then he unbuckled a strap and a girdle of leather and gave his huge

sword to his son, saying: "This that has brought our family down the

ages unto this day shall surely guard you always upon your journey, even

though you fare beyond the fields we know."



And the young man took it though he knew that no such sword could avail

him.



Near the Castle of Erl there lived a lonely witch, on high land near the

thunder, which used to roll in Summer along the hills. There she dwelt

by herself in a narrow cottage of thatch and roamed the high fields

alone to gather the thunderbolts. Of these thunderbolts, that had no

earthly forging, were made, with suitable runes, such weapons as had to

parry unearthly dangers.



And alone would roam this witch at certain tides of Spring, taking the

form of a young girl in her beauty, singing among tall flowers in

gardens of Erl. She would go at the hour when hawk-moths first pass from

bell to bell. And of those few that had seen her was this son of the

Lord of Erl. And though it was calamity to love her, though it rapt

men's thoughts away from all things true, yet the beauty of the form

that was not hers had lured him to gaze at her with deep young eyes,

till--whether flattery or pity moved her, who knows that is mortal?--she

spared him whom her arts might well have destroyed and, changing

instantly in that garden there, showed him the rightful form of a deadly

witch. And even then his eyes did not at once forsake her, and in the

moments that his glance still lingered upon that withered shape that

haunted the hollyhocks he had her gratitude that may not be bought, nor

won by any charms that Christians know. And she had beckoned to him and

he had followed, and learned from her on her thunder-haunted hill that

on the day of need a sword might be made of metals not sprung from

Earth, with runes along it that would waft away, certainly any thrust of

earthly sword, and except for three master-runes could thwart the

weapons of Elfland.



As he took his father's sword the young man thought of the witch.



It was scarcely dark in the valley when he left the Castle of Erl, and

went so swiftly up the witch's hill that a dim light lingered yet on its

highest heaths when he came near the cottage of the one that he sought,

and found her burning bones at a fire in the open. To her he said that

the day of his need was come. And she bade him gather thunderbolts in

her garden, in the soft earth under her cabbages.



And there with eyes that saw every minute more dimly, and fingers that

grew accustomed to the thunderbolts' curious surfaces, he found before

darkness came down on him seventeen: and these he heaped into a silken

kerchief and carried back to the witch.



On the grass beside her he laid those strangers to Earth. From

wonderful spaces they came to her magical garden, shaken by thunder from

paths that we cannot tread; and though not in themselves containing

magic were well adapted to carry what magic her runes could give. She

laid the thigh-bone of a materialist down, and turned to those stormy

wanderers. She arranged them in one straight row by the side of her

fire. And over them then she toppled the burning logs and the embers,

prodding them down with the ebon stick that is the sceptre of witches,

until she had deeply covered those seventeen cousins of Earth that had

visited us from their etherial home. She stepped back then from her fire

and stretched out her hands, and suddenly blasted it with a frightful

rune. The flames leaped up in amazement. And what had been but a lonely

fire in the night, with no more mystery than pertains to all such fires,

flared suddenly into a thing that wanderers feared.



As the green flames, stung by her runes, leaped up, and the heat of the

fire grew intenser, she stepped backwards further and further, and

merely uttered her runes a little louder the further she got from the

fire. She bade Alveric pile on logs, dark logs of oak that lay there

cumbering the heath; and at once, as he dropped them on, the heat licked

them up; and the witch went on pronouncing her louder runes, and the

flames danced wild and green; and down in the embers the seventeen,

whose paths had once crossed Earth's when they wandered free, knew heat

again as great as they had known, even on that desperate ride that had

brought them here. And when Alveric could no longer come near the fire,

and the witch was some yards from it shouting her runes, the magical

flames burned all the ashes away and that portent that flared on the

hill as suddenly ceased, leaving only a circle that sullenly glowed on

the ground, like the evil pool that glares where thermite has burst.

And flat in the glow, all liquid still, lay the sword.



The witch approached it and pared its edges with a sword that she drew

from her thigh. Then she sat down beside it on the earth and sang to it

while it cooled. Not like the runes that enraged the flames was the song

she sang to the sword: she whose curses had blasted the fire till it

shrivelled big logs of oak crooned now a melody like a wind in summer

blowing from wild wood gardens that no man tended, down valleys loved

once by children, now lost to them but for dreams, a song of such

memories as lurk and hide along the edges of oblivion, now flashing from

beautiful years a glimpse of some golden moment, now passing swiftly

out of remembrance again, to go back to the shades of oblivion, and

leaving on the mind those faintest traces of little shining feet which

when dimly perceived by us are called regrets. She sang of old Summer

noons in the time of harebells: she sang on that high dark heath a song

that seemed so full of mornings and evenings preserved with all their

dews by her magical craft from days that had else been lost, that

Alveric wondered of each small wandering wing, that her fire had lured

from the dusk, if this were the ghost of some day lost to man, called up

by the force of her song from times that were fairer. And all the while

the unearthly metal grew harder. The white liquid stiffened and turned

red. The glow of the red dwindled. And as it cooled it narrowed: little

particles came together, little crevices closed: and as they closed they

seized the air about them, and with the air they caught the witch's

rune, and gripped it and held it forever. And so it was it became a

magical sword. And little magic there is in English woods, from the

time of anemones to the falling of leaves, that was not in the sword.

And little magic there is in southern downs, that only sheep roam over

and quiet shepherds, that the sword had not too. And there was scent of

thyme in it and sight of lilac, and the chorus of birds that sings

before dawn in April, and the deep proud splendour of rhododendrons, and

the litheness and laughter of streams, and miles and miles of may. And

by the time the sword was black it was all enchanted with magic.



Nobody can tell you about that sword all that there is to be told of it;

for those that know of those paths of Space on which its metals once

floated, till Earth caught them one by one as she sailed past on her

orbit, have little time to waste on such things as magic, and so cannot

tell you how the sword was made, and those who know whence poetry is,

and the need that man has for song, or know any one of the fifty

branches of magic, have little time to waste on such things as science,

and so cannot tell you whence its ingredients came. Enough that it was

once beyond our Earth and was now here amongst our mundane stones; that

it was once but as those stones, and now had something in it such as

soft music has; let those that can define it.



And now the witch drew the black blade forth by the hilt, which was

thick and on one side rounded, for she had cut a small groove in the

soil below the hilt for this purpose, and began to sharpen both sides of

the sword by rubbing them with a curious greenish stone, still singing

over the sword an eerie song.



Alveric watched her in silence, wondering, not counting time; it may

have been for moments, it may have been while the stars went far on

their courses. Suddenly she was finished. She stood up with the sword

lying on both her hands. She stretched it out curtly to Alveric; he

took it, she turned away; and there was a look in her eyes as though she

would have kept that sword, or kept Alveric. He turned to pour out his

thanks, but she was gone.



He rapped on the door of the dark house; he called "Witch, Witch" along

the lonely heath, till children heard on far farms and were terrified.

Then he turned home, and that was best for him.









                              CHAPTER II



            _Alveric Comes in Sight of the Elfin Mountains_





To the long chamber, sparsely furnished, high in a tower, in which

Alveric slept, there came a ray direct from the rising sun. He awoke,

and remembered at once the magical sword, which made all his awaking

joyous. It is natural to feel glad at the thought of a recent gift, but

there was also a certain joy in the sword itself, which perhaps could

communicate with Alveric's thoughts all the more easily just as they

came from dreamland, which was pre-eminently the sword's own country;

but, however it be, all those that have come by a magical sword, have

always felt that joy while it still was new, clearly and unmistakably.



He had no farewells to make, but thought it better instantly to obey his

father's command than to stay to explain why he took upon his adventure

a sword that he deemed to be better than the one his father loved. So he

stayed not even to eat, but put food in a wallet and slung over him by a

strap a bottle of good new leather, not waiting to fill it for he knew

he should meet with streams; and, wearing his father's sword as swords

are commonly worn, he slung the other over his back with its rough hilt

tied near his shoulder, and strode away from the Castle and Vale of Erl.

Of money he took but little, half a handful of copper only, for use in

the fields we know; for he knew not what coin or what means of exchange

were used on the other side of the frontier of twilight.



Now the Vale of Erl is very near to the border beyond which there is

none of the fields we know. He climbed the hill and strode over the

fields and passed through woods of hazel; and the blue sky shone on him

merrily as he went by the way of the fields, and the blue was as bright

by his feet when he came to the woods, for it was the time of the

bluebells. He ate, and filled his water-bottle, and travelled all day

eastwards, and at evening the mountains of faery came floating into

view, the colour of pale forget-me-nots.



As the sun set behind Alveric he looked at those pale-blue mountains to

see with what colour their peaks would astonish the evening; but never a

tint they took from the setting sun, whose splendour was gilding all the

fields we know, never a wrinkle faded upon their precipices, never a

shadow deepened, and Alveric learned that for nothing that happens here

is any change in the enchanted lands.



He turned his eyes from their serene pale beauty back to the fields we

know. And there, with their gables lifting into the sunlight above deep

hedgerows beautiful with Spring, he saw the cottages of earthly men.

Past them he walked while the beauty of evening grew, with songs of

birds, and scents wandering from flowers, and odours that deepened and

deepened, and evening decked herself to receive the Evening Star. But

before that star appeared the young adventurer found the cottage he

sought; for, flapping above its doorway, he saw the sign of huge brown

hide with outlandish letters in gilt which proclaimed the dweller below

to be a worker in leather.



An old man came to the door when Alveric knocked, little and bent with

age, and he bent more when Alveric named himself. And the young man

asked for a scabbard for his sword, yet said not what sword it was. And

they both went into the cottage where the old wife was, by her big fire,

and the couple did honour to Alveric. The old man then sat down near his

thick table, whose surface shone with smoothness wherever it was not

pitted by little tools that had drilled through pieces of leather all

that man's lifetime and in the times of his fathers. And then he laid

the sword upon his knees and wondered at the roughness of hilt and

guard, for they were raw unworked metal, and at the huge width of the

sword; and then he screwed up his eyes and began to think of his trade.

And in a while he thought out what must be done; and his wife brought

him a fine hide; and he marked out on it two pieces as wide as the

sword, and a bit wider than that.



And any questions he asked concerning that wide bright sword Alveric

somewhat parried, for he wished not to perplex his mind by telling him

all that it was: he perplexed that old couple enough a little later when

he asked them for lodging for the night. And this they gave him with as

many apologies as if it were they that had asked a favour, and gave him

a great supper out of their cauldron, in which boiled everything that

the old man snared; but nothing that Alveric was able to say prevented

them giving up their bed to him and preparing a heap of skins for their

own night's rest by the fire.



And after their supper the old man cut out the two wide pieces of

leather with a point at the end of each and began to stitch them

together on each side. And then Alveric began to ask him of the way,

and the old leather-worker spoke of North and South and West and even of

north-east, but of East or south-east he spoke never a word. He dwelt

near the very edge of the fields we know, yet of any hint of anything

lying beyond them he or his wife said nothing. Where Alveric's journey

lay upon the morrow they seemed to think the world ended.



And pondering afterwards, in the bed they gave him, all that the old man

had said, Alveric sometimes marvelled at his ignorance, and yet

sometimes wondered if it might have been skill by which those two had

avoided all the evening any word of anything lying to the East or

south-east of their home. He wondered if in his early days the old man

might have gone there, but he was unable even to wonder what he had

found there if he had gone. Then Alveric fell asleep, and dreams gave

him hints and guesses of the old man's wanderings in Fairyland, but gave

him no better guides than he had already, and these were the pale-blue

peaks of the Elfin Mountains.



The old man woke him after he had slept long. When he came to the

day-room a bright fire was burning there, his breakfast was ready for

him and the scabbard made, which fitted the sword exactly. The old

people waited on him silently and took payment for the scabbard, but

would not take aught for their hospitality. Silently they watched him

rise to go, and followed him without a word to the door, and outside it

watched him still, clearly hoping that he would turn to the North or

West; but when he turned and strode for the Elfin Mountains, they

watched him no more, for their faces never were turned that way. And

though they watched him no longer yet he waved his hand in farewell;

for he had a feeling for the cottages and fields of these simple folk,

such as they had not for the enchanted lands. He walked in the sparkling

morning through scenes familiar from infancy; he saw the ruddy orchis

flowering early, reminding the bluebells they were just past their

prime; the small young leaves of the oak were yet a brownish yellow; the

new beech-leaves shone like brass, where the cuckoo was calling clearly;

and a birch tree looked like a wild woodland creature that had draped

herself in green gauze; on favoured bushes there were buds of may.

Alveric said over and over to himself farewell to all these things: the

cuckoo went on calling, and not for him. And then, as he pushed through

a hedge into a field untended, there suddenly close before him in the

field was, as his father had told, the frontier of twilight. It

stretched across the fields in front of him, blue and dense like water;

and things seen through it seemed misshapen and shining. He looked back

once over the fields we know; the cuckoo went on calling unconcernedly;

a small bird sang about its own affairs; and, nothing seeming to answer

or heed his farewells, Alveric strode on boldly into those long masses

of twilight.



A man in a field not far was calling to horses, there were folk talking

in a neighbouring lane, as Alveric stepped into the rampart of twilight;

at once all these sounds grew dim, humming faintly, as from great

distances: in a few strides he was through, and not a murmur at all came

then from the fields we know. The fields through which he had come had

suddenly ended; there was no trace of its hedges bright with new green;

he looked back, and the frontier seemed lowering, cloudy and smoky; he

looked all round and saw no familiar thing; in the place of the beauty

of May were the wonders and splendours of Elfland.



The pale-blue mountains stood august in their glory, shimmering and

rippling in a golden light that seemed as though it rhythmically poured

from the peaks and flooded all those slopes with breezes of gold. And

below them, far off as yet, he saw going up all silver into the air the

spires of the palace only told of in song. He was on a plain on which

the flowers were queer and the shape of the trees monstrous. He started

at once toward the silver spires.



To those who may have wisely kept their fancies within the boundary of

the fields we know it is difficult for me to tell of the land to which

Alveric had come, so that in their minds they can see that plain with

its scattered trees and far off the dark wood out of which the palace of

Elfland lifted those glittering spires, and above them and beyond them

that serene range of mountains whose pinnacles took no colour from any

light we see. Yet it is for this very purpose that our fancies travel

far, and if my reader through fault of mine fail to picture the peaks of

Elfland my fancy had better have stayed in the fields we know. Know then

that in Elfland are colours more deep than are in our fields, and the

very air there glows with so deep a lucency that all things seen there

have something of the look of our trees and flowers in June reflected in

water. And the colour of Elfland, of which I despaired to tell, may yet

be told, for we have hints of it here; the deep blue of the night in

Summer just as the gloaming has gone, the pale blue of Venus flooding

the evening with light, the deeps of lakes in the twilight, all these

are hints of that colour. And while our sunflowers carefully turned to

the sun, some forefather of the rhododendrons must have turned a little

towards Elfland, so that some of that glory dwells with them to this

day. And, above all, our painters have had many a glimpse of that

country, so that sometimes in pictures we see a glamour too wonderful

for our fields; it is a memory of theirs that intruded from some old

glimpse of the pale-blue mountains while they sat at easels painting the

fields we know.



So Alveric strode on through the luminous air of that land whose

glimpses dimly remembered are inspirations here. And at once he felt

less lonely. For there is a barrier in the fields we know, drawn sharply

between men and all other life, so that if we be but a day away from our

kind we are lonely; but once across the boundary of twilight and Alveric

saw this barrier was down. Crows walking on the moor looked whimsically

at him, all manner of little creatures peered curiously to see who was

come from a quarter whence so few ever came; to see who went on a

journey whence so few ever returned; for the King of Elfland guarded his

daughter well, as Alveric knew although he knew not how. There was a

merry sparkle of interest in all those little eyes, and a look that

might mean warning.



There was perhaps less mystery here than on our side of the boundary of

twilight; for nothing lurked or seemed to lurk behind great boles of

oak, as in certain lights and seasons things may lurk in the fields we

know; no strangeness hid on the far side of ridges; nothing haunted deep

woods; whatever might possibly lurk was clearly there to be seen,

whatever strangeness might be was spread in full sight of the traveller,

whatever might haunt deep woods lived there in the open day.



And, so strong lay the enchantment deep over all that land, that not

only did beasts and men guess each other's meanings well, but there

seemed to be an understanding even, that reached from men to trees and

from trees to men. Lonely pine trees that Alveric passed now and then on

the moor, their trunks glowing always with the ruddy light that they had

got by magic from some old sunset, seemed to stand with their branches

akimbo and lean over a little to look at him. It seemed almost as though

they had not always been trees, before enchantment had overtaken them

there; it seemed they would tell him something.



But Alveric heeded no warnings either from beasts or trees, and strode

away toward the enchanted wood.









                              CHAPTER III



        _The Magical Sword Meets Some of the Swords of Elfland_





When Alveric came to the enchanted wood the light in which Elfland

glowed had neither grown nor dwindled, and he saw that it came from no

radiance that shines on the fields we know, unless the wandering lights

of wonderful moments that sometimes astonish our fields, and are gone

the instant they come, are strayed over the border of Elfland by some

momentary disorder of magic. Neither sun nor moon made the light of that

enchanted day.



A line of pine trees up which ivy climbed, as high as their lowering

black foliage, stood like sentinels at the edge of the wood. The silver

spires were shining as though it were they that made all this azure glow

in which Elfland swam. And Alveric having by now come far into Elfland,

and being now before its capital palace, and knowing that Elfland

guarded its mysteries well, drew his father's sword before he entered

the wood. The other still hung on his back, slung in its new scabbard

over his left shoulder.



And the moment he passed by one of those guardian pine trees, the ivy

that lived on it unfastened its tendrils and, rapidly letting itself

down, came straight for Alveric and clutched at his throat.



The long thin sword of his father was just in time; had it not been

drawn he would have scarcely got it out, so swift was the rush of the

ivy. He cut tendril after tendril that grasped his limbs as ivy grasps

old towers, and still more tendrils came for him, until he severed its

main stem between him and the tree. And as he was doing this he heard a

hissing rush behind him, and another had come down from another tree and

was rushing at him with all its leaves spread out. The green thing

looked wild and angry as it gripped his left shoulder as though it would

hold it forever. But Alveric severed those tendrils with a blow of his

sword and then fought with the rest, while the first one was still alive

but now too short to reach him, and was lashing its branches angrily on

the ground. And soon, as the surprise of the attack was over and he had

freed himself of the tendrils that had gripped him, Alveric stepped back

till the ivy could not reach him and he could still fight it with his

long sword. The ivy crawled back then to lure Alveric on, and sprang at

him when he followed it. But, terrible though the grip of ivy is, that

was a good sharp sword; and very soon Alveric, all bruised though he

was, had so lopped his assailant that it fled back up its tree. Then he

stepped back and looked at the wood in the light of his new experience,

choosing a way through. He saw at once that in the barrier of pine trees

the two in front of him had had their ivy so shortened in the fight that

if he went mid-way between the two the ivy of neither would be able to

reach him. He then stepped forward, but the moment he did so he noticed

one of the pine trees move closer to the other. He knew then that the

time was come to draw his magical sword.



So he returned his father's sword to the scabbard by his side and drew

out the other over his shoulder and, going straight up to the tree that

had moved, swept at the ivy as it sprang at him: and the ivy fell all at

once to the ground, not lifeless but a heap of common ivy. And then he

gave one blow to the trunk of the tree, and a chip flew out not larger

than a common sword would have made, but the whole tree shuddered; and

with that shudder disappeared at once a certain ominous look that the

pine had had, and it stood there an ordinary unenchanted tree. Then he

stepped on through the wood with his sword drawn.



He had not gone many paces when he heard behind him a sound like a faint

breeze in the tree-tops, yet no wind was blowing in that wood at all. He

looked round therefore, and saw that the pine trees were following him.

They were coming slowly after him, keeping well out of the way of his

sword, but to left and right they were gaining on him, so that he saw he

was being gradually shut in by a crescent that grew thicker and thicker

as it crowded amongst the trees that it met on the way, and would soon

crush him to death. Alveric saw at once that to turn back would be

fatal, and decided to push right on, relying chiefly on speed; for his

quick perception had already noticed something slow about the magic that

swayed the wood; as though whoever controlled it were old or weary of

magic, or interrupted by other things. So he went straight ahead,

hitting every tree in his way, whether enchanted or not, a blow with his

magical sword; and the runes that ran in that metal from the other side

of the sun were stronger than any spells that there were in the wood.

Great oak trees with sinister boles drooped and lost all their

enchantment as Alveric flashed past them with a flick of that magical

sword. He was marching faster than the clumsy pines. And soon he left in

that weird and eerie wood a wake of trees that were wholly unenchanted,

that stood there now without hint of romance or mystery even.



And all of a sudden he came from the gloom of the wood to the emerald

glory of the Elf King's lawns. Again, we have hints of such things here.

Imagine lawns of ours just emerging from night, flashing early lights

from their dewdrops when all the stars have gone; bordered with flowers

that just begin to appear, their gentle colours all coming back after

night; untrodden by any feet except the tiniest and wildest; shut off

from the wind and the world by trees in whose fronds is still darkness:

picture these waiting for the birds to sing; there is almost a hint

there sometimes of the glow of the lawns of Elfland; but then it passes

so quickly that we can never be sure. More beautiful than aught our

wonder guesses, more than our hearts have hoped, were the dewdrop lights

and twilights in which these lawns glowed and shone. And we have another

thing by which to hint of them, those seaweeds or sea-mosses that drape

Mediterranean rocks and shine out of blue-green water for gazers from

dizzy cliffs: more like sea-floors were these lawns than like any land

of ours, for the air of Elfland is thus deep and blue.



At the beauty of these lawns Alveric stood gazing as they shone through

twilight and dew, surrounded by the mauve and ruddy glory of the massed

flowers of Elfland, beside which our sunsets pale and our orchids droop;

and beyond them lay like night the magical wood. And jutting from that

wood, with glittering portals all open wide to the lawns, with windows

more blue than our sky on Summer's nights; as though built of starlight;

shone that palace that may be only told of in song.



As Alveric stood there with his sword in his hand, at the wood's edge,

scarcely breathing, with his eyes looking over the lawns at the chiefest

glory of Elfland; through one of the portals alone came the King of

Elfland's daughter. She walked dazzling to the lawns without seeing

Alveric. Her feet brushed through the dew and the heavy air and gently

pressed for an instant the emerald grass, which bent and rose, as our

harebells when blue butterflies light and leave them, roaming care-free

along the hills of chalk.



And as she passed he neither breathed nor moved, nor could have moved if

those pines had still pursued him, but they stayed in the forest not

daring to touch those lawns.



She wore a crown that seemed to be carved of great pale sapphires; she

shone on those lawns and gardens like a dawn coming unaware, out of long

night, on some planet nearer than us to the sun. And as she passed near

Alveric she suddenly turned her head; and her eyes opened in a little

wonder. She had never before seen a man from the fields we know.



And Alveric gazed in her eyes all speechless and powerless still: it was

indeed the Princess Lirazel in her beauty. And then he saw that her

crown was not of sapphires but ice.



"Who are you?" she said. And her voice had the music that, of earthly

things, was most like ice in thousands of broken pieces rocked by a wind

of Spring upon lakes in some northern country.



And he said: "I come from the fields that are mapped and known."



And then she sighed for a moment for those fields, for she had heard how

life beautifully passes there, and how there are always in those fields

young generations, and she thought of the changing seasons and children

and age, of which elfin minstrels had sung when they told of Earth.



And when he saw her sigh for the fields we know he told her somewhat of

that land whence he had come. And she questioned him further, and soon

he was telling her tales of his home and the Vale of Erl. And she

wondered to hear of it and asked him many questions more; and then he

told her all that he knew of Earth, not presuming to tell Earth's story

from what his own eyes had seen in his bare score of years, but telling

those tales and fables of the ways of beasts and men, that the folk of

Erl had drawn out of the ages, and which their elders told by the fire

at evening when children asked of what happened long ago. Thus on the

edge of those lawns whose miraculous glory was framed by flowers we have

never known, with the magical wood behind them, and that palace shining

near which may only be told of in song, they spoke of the simple wisdom

of old men and old women, telling of harvests and the blossoming of

roses and may, of when to plant in gardens, of what wild animals knew;

how to heal, how to sow, how to thatch, and of which of the winds in

what seasons blow over the fields we know.



And then there appeared those knights who guard that palace lest any

should come through the enchanted wood. Four of them they came shining

over the lawns in armour, their faces not to be seen. In all the

enchanted centuries of their lives they had not dared to dream of the

princess: they had never bared their faces when they knelt armed before

her. Yet they had sworn an oath of dreadful words that no man else

should ever speak with her, if one should come through the enchanted

wood. With this oath now on their lips they marched towards Alveric.



Lirazel looked at them sorrowfully yet could not halt them, for they

came by command of her father which she could not avert; and well she

knew that her father might not recall his command, for he had uttered it

ages ago at the bidding of Fate. Alveric looked at their armour, which

seemed to be brighter than any metal of ours, as though it came from one

of those buttresses near, which are only told of in song; then he went

towards them drawing his father's sword, for he thought to drive its

slender point through some joint of the armour. The other he put into

his left hand.



As the first knight struck, Alveric parried, and stopped the blow, but

there came a shock like lightning into his arm and the sword flew from

his hand, and he knew that no earthly sword could meet the weapons of

Elfland, and took the magical sword in his right hand. With this he

parried the strokes of the Princess Lirazel's guard, for such these four

knights were, having waited for this occasion through all the ages of

Elfland. And no more shock came to him from any of those swords, but

only a vibration in his own sword's metal that passed through it like a

song, and a kind of a glow that arose in it, reaching to Alveric's heart

and cheering it.



But as Alveric continued to parry the swift blows of the guard, that

sword that was kin to the lightning grew weary of these defences, for it

had in its essence speed and desperate journeys; and, lifting Alveric's

hand along with it, it swept blows at the elvish knights, and the

armour of Elfland could not hold it out. Thick and curious blood began

to pour through rifts in the armour, and soon of that glittering company

two were fallen; and Alveric, encouraged by the zeal of his sword fought

cheerily and soon overthrew another, so that only he and one of the

guard remained, who seemed to have some stronger magic about him than

had been given to his fallen comrades. And so it was, for when the Elf

King had first enchanted the guard he had charmed this elvish soldier

first of all, while all the wonder of his runes were new; and the

soldier and his armour and his sword had something still of this early

magic about them, more potent than any inspirations of wizardry that had

come later from his master's mind. Yet this knight, as Alveric soon was

able to feel along his arm and his sword, had none of those three master

runes of which the old witch had spoken when she made the sword on her

hill; for these were preserved unuttered by the King of Elfland himself,

with which to hedge his own presence. To have known of their existence

she must have flown by broom to Elfland and spoken secretly alone with

the King.



And the sword that had visited Earth from so far away smote like the

falling of thunderbolts; and green sparks rose from the armour, and

crimson as sword met sword; and thick elvish blood moved slowly, from

wide slits, down the cuirass; and Lirazel gazed in awe and wonder and

love; and the combatants edged away fighting into the forest; and

branches fell on them hacked off by their fight; and the runes in

Alveric's far-travelled sword exulted, and roared at the elf-knight;

until in the dark of the wood, amongst branches severed from

disenchanted trees, with a blow like that of a thunderbolt riving an oak

tree, Alveric slew him.



At that crash, and at that silence, Lirazel ran to his side.



"Quick!" she said. "For my father has three runes ..." She durst not

speak of them.



"Whither?" said Alveric.



And she said: "To the fields you know."









                              CHAPTER IV



            _Alveric Comes Back to Earth After Many Years_





Back through the guarding wood went Alveric and Lirazel, she only

looking once more at those flowers and lawns, seen only by the

furthest-travelling fancies of poets in deepest sleep, then urging

Alveric on; he choosing the way past trees he had disenchanted.



And she would not let him delay even to choose his path, but kept urging

him away from the palace that is only told of in song. And the other

trees began to come lumbering towards them, from beyond the lustreless

unromantic line that Alveric's sword had smitten, looking queerly as

they came at their stricken comrades, whose listless branches drooped

without magic or mystery. And as the moving trees came nearer Lirazel

would hold up her hand, and they all halted and came on no more; and

still she urged upon Alveric to hasten.



She knew her father would climb the brazen stairs of one of those silver

spires, she knew he would soon come out on to a high balcony, she knew

what rune he would chant. She heard the sound of his footsteps

ascending, ringing now through the wood. They fled over the plain beyond

the wood, all through the blue everlasting elfin day, and again and

again she looked over her shoulder and urged Alveric on. The Elf King's

feet boomed slow on the thousand brazen steps, and she hoped to reach

the barrier of twilight, which on that side was smoky and dull; when

suddenly, as she looked for the hundredth time at the distant balconies

of the glittering spires, she saw a door begin to open high up, above

the palace only told of in song. She cried "Alas!" to Alveric, but at

that moment the scent of briar roses came drifting to them from the

fields we know.



Alveric knew not fatigue for he was young, nor she for she was ageless.

They rushed forward, he taking her hand; the Elf King lifted his beard,

and just as he began to intone a rune that only once may be uttered,

against which nothing from our fields can avail, they were through the

frontier of twilight, and the rune shook and troubled those lands in

which Lirazel walked no longer.



When Lirazel looked upon the fields we know, as strange to her as once

they have been to us, their beauty delighted her. She laughed to see the

haystacks and loved their quaintness. A lark was singing and Lirazel

spoke to it, and the lark seemed not to understand, but she turned to

other glories of our fields, for all were new to her, and forgot the

lark. It was curiously no longer the season of bluebells, for all the

foxgloves were blooming and the may was gone and the wild roses were

there. Alveric never understood this.



It was early morning and the sun was shining, giving soft colours to our

fields, and Lirazel rejoiced in those fields of ours at more common

things than one might believe there were amongst the familiar sights of

Earth's every day. So glad was she, so gay, with her cries of surprise

and her laughter, that there seemed thenceforth to Alveric a beauty

that he had never dreamed of in buttercups, and a humour in carts that

he never had thought of before. Each moment she found with a cry of

joyous discovery some treasure of Earth's that he had not known to be

fair. And then, as he watched her bringing a beauty to our fields more

delicate even than that the wild roses brought, he saw that her crown of

ice had melted away.



And thus she came from the palace that may only be told of in song, over

the fields of which I need not tell, for they were the familiar fields

of Earth, that the ages change but little and only for a while, and came

at evening with Alveric to his home.



All was changed in the Castle of Erl. In the gateway they met a guardian

whom Alveric knew: the man wondered to see them. In the hall and upon

the stairway they met some that tended the castle, who turned their

heads in surprise. Alveric knew them also, but all were older; and he

saw that quite ten years must have passed away during that one blue day

he had spent in Elfland.



Who does not know that this is the way of Elfland? And yet who would not

be surprised if they saw it happen as Alveric saw it now? He turned to

Lirazel and told her how ten or twelve years were gone. But it was as

though a humble man who had wed an earthly princess should tell her he

had lost sixpence; time had had no value or meaning to Lirazel, and she

was untroubled to hear of the ten lost years. She did not dream what

time means to us here.



They told Alveric that his father was long since dead. And one told him

how he died happy, without impatience, trusting to Alveric to accomplish

his bidding; for he had known somewhat of the ways of Elfland, and knew

that those that traffic twixt here and there must have something of that

calm in which Elfland forever dreams.



Up the valley, ringing late, they heard the blacksmith's work. This

blacksmith was he who had been the spokesman of those who went once to

the long red room to the Lord of Erl. And all these men yet lived; for

time though it moved over the Vale of Erl, as over all fields we know,

moved gently, not as in our cities.



Thence Alveric and Lirazel went to the holy place of the Freer. And when

they found him Alveric asked the Freer to wed them with Christom rites.

And when the Freer saw the beauty of Lirazel flash mid the common things

in his little holy place, for he had ornamented the walls of his house

with knick-knacks that he sometimes bought at the fairs, he feared at

once she was of no mortal line. And, when he asked her whence she came

and she happily answered "Elfland," the good man clasped his hands and

told her earnestly how all in that land dwelt beyond salvation. But she

smiled, for while in Elfland she had always been idly happy, and now she

only cared for Alveric. The Freer went then to his books to see what

should be done.



For a long while he read in silence but for his breathing, while Alveric

and Lirazel stood before him. And at last he found in his book a form of

service for the wedding of a mermaid that had forsaken the sea, though

the good book told not of Elfland. And this he said would suffice, for

that the mermaids dwelt equally with the elf-folk beyond thought of

salvation. So he sent for his bell and such tapers as are necessary.

Then, turning to Lirazel, he bade her forsake and forswear and solemnly

to renounce all things pertaining to Elfland, reading slowly out of a

book the words to be used on this wholesome occasion.



"Good Freer," Lirazel answered, "nought said in these fields can cross

the barrier of Elfland. And well that this is so, for my father has

three runes that could blast this book when he answered one of its

spells, were any word able to pass through the frontier of twilight. I

will spell no spells with my father."



"But I cannot wed Christom man," the Freer replied, "with one of the

stubborn who dwell beyond salvation."



Then Alveric implored her and she said the say in the book, "though my

father could blast this spell," she added, "if it ever crossed one of

his runes." And, the bell being now brought and the tapers, the good man

wedded them in his little house with the rites that are proper for the

wedding of a mermaid that hath forsaken the sea.









                               CHAPTER V



                 _The Wisdom of the Parliament of Erl_





In those bridal days the men of Erl came often to the castle, bringing

gifts and felicitations; and in the evenings they would talk in their

houses of the fair things that they hoped for the Vale of Erl on account

of the wisdom of the thing they had done when they spoke with the old

lord in his long red room.



There was Narl the blacksmith, who had been their leader; there was

Guhic, who first had thought of it, after speaking with his wife, an

upland farmer of clover pastures near Erl; there was Nehic a driver of

horses; there were four vendors of beeves; and Oth, a hunter of deer;

and Vlel the master-ploughman: all these and three men more had gone to

the Lord of Erl and made that request that had set Alveric on his

wanderings. And now they spoke of all the good that would come of it.

They had all desired that the Vale of Erl should be known among men, as

was, they felt, its desert. They had looked in histories, they had read

books treating of pasture, yet seldom found mention at all of the vale

they loved. And one day Guhic had said "Let all us people be ruled in

the future by a magic lord, and he shall make the name of the valley

famous, and there shall be none that have heard not the name of Erl."



And all had rejoiced and had made a parliament; and it had gone, twelve

men, to the Lord of Erl. And it had been as I have told.



So now they spoke over their mead of the future of Erl, and its place

among other valleys, and of the reputation that it should have in the

world. They would meet and talk in the great forge of Narl, and Narl

would bring them mead from an inner room, and Threl would come in late

from his work in the woods. The mead was of clover honey, heavy and

sweet; and when they had sat awhile in the warm room, talking of daily

things of the valley and uplands, they would turn their minds to the

future, seeing as through a golden mist the glory of Erl. One praised

the beeves, another the horses, another the good soil, and all looked to

the time when other lands should know the great mastery among valleys

that was held by the valley of Erl.



And Time that brought these evenings bore them away, moving over the

Vale of Erl as over all fields we know, and it was Spring again and the

season of bluebells. And one day in the prime of the wild anemones, it

was told that Alveric and Lirazel had a son.



Then all the people of Erl lit a fire next night on the hill, and danced

about it and drank mead and rejoiced. All day they had dragged logs and

branches for it from a wild wood near, and the glow of the fire was seen

in other lands. Only on the pale-blue peaks of the mountains of Elfland

no gleam of it shone, for they are unchanged by ought that can happen

here.



And when they rested from dancing round their fires they would sit on

the ground and foretell the fortune of Erl, when it should be ruled over

by this son of Alveric with all the magic he would have from his

mother. And some said he would lead them to war, and some said to deeper

ploughing; and all foretold a better price for their beeves. None slept

that night for dancing and foretelling a glorious future, and for

rejoicing at the things they foretold. And above all they rejoiced that

the name of Erl should be thenceforth known and honoured in other lands.



Then Alveric sought for a nurse for his child, all through the valley

and uplands, and not easily found any worthy of having the care of one

that was of the royal line of Elfland; and those that he found were

frightened of the light, as though not of our Earth or sky, that seemed

to shine at times in the baby's eyes. And in the end he went one windy

morning up the hill of the lonely witch, and found her sitting idly in

her doorway, having nothing to curse or bless.



"Well," said the witch, "did the sword bring you fortune?"



"Who knows," said Alveric, "what brings fortune, since we cannot see the

end?"



And he spoke wearily, for he was weary with age, and never knew how many

years had gone over him on the day he travelled to Elfland; far more it

seemed than had passed on that same day over Erl.



"Aye," said the witch. "Who knows the end but we?"



"Mother Witch," said Alveric, "I wedded the King of Elfland's daughter."



"That was a great advancement," said the old witch.



"Mother Witch," said Alveric, "we have a child. And who shall care for

him?"



"No human task," said the witch.



"Mother Witch," said Alveric, "will you come to the Vale of Erl and

care for him and be the nurse at the castle? For none but you in all

these fields knows ought of the things of Elfland, except the princess,

and she knows nothing of Earth."



And the old witch answered: "For the sake of the King I will come."



So the witch came down from the hill with a bundle of queer belongings.

And thus the child was nursed in the fields we know by one who knew

songs and tales of his mother's country.



And often, as they bent together over the baby, that aged witch and the

Princess Lirazel would talk together, and afterwards through long

evenings, of things about which Alveric knew nothing: and for all the

age of the witch, and the wisdom that she had stored in her hundred

years, which is all hidden from man, it was nevertheless she who learned

when they talked together, and the Princess Lirazel who taught. But of

Earth and the ways of Earth Lirazel never knew anything.



And this old witch that watched over the baby so tended him and so

soothed, that in all his infancy he never wept. For she had a charm for

brightening the morning, and a charm for cheering the day, and a charm

for calming a cough, and a charm for making the nursery warm and

pleasant and eerie, when the fire leaped up at the sound of it, from

logs that she had enchanted, and sent large shadows of the things about

the fire quivering dark and merry over the ceiling.



And the child was cared for by Lirazel and the witch as children are

cared for whose mothers are merely human; but he knew tunes and runes

besides, that other children hear not in fields we know.



So the old witch moved about the nursery with her black stick, guarding

the child with her runes. If a draught on windy nights shrilled in

through some crack she had a spell to calm it; and a spell to charm the

song that the kettle sang, till its melody brought hints of strange news

from mist-hidden places, and the child grew to know the mystery of far

valleys that his eyes had never seen. And at evening she would raise her

ebon stick and, standing before the fire amongst all the shadows, would

enchant them and make them dance for him. And they took all manner of

shapes of good and evil, dancing to please the baby; so that he came to

have knowledge not only of the things with which Earth is stored; pigs,

trees, camels, crocodiles, wolves, and ducks, good dogs and the gentle

cow; but of the darker things also that men have feared, and the things

they have hoped and guessed. Through those evenings the things that

happen, and the creatures that are, passed over those nursery walls, and

he grew familiar with the fields we know. And on warm afternoons the

witch would carry him through the village, and all the dogs would bark

at her eerie figure, but durst not come too close, for a page-boy behind

her carried the ebon stick. And dogs, that know so much, that know how

far a man can throw a stone, and if he would beat them, and if he durst

not, knew also that this was no ordinary stick. So they kept far away

from that queer black stick in the hand of the page, and snarled, and

the villagers came out to see. And all were glad when they saw how

magical a nurse the young heir had, "for here," they said, "is the witch

Ziroonderel," and they declared that she would bring him up amongst the

true principles of wizardry, and that in his time there would be magic

that would make all their valley famous. And they beat their dogs until

they slunk indoors, but the dogs clung to their suspicions still. So

that when the men were gone to the forge of Narl, and their houses were

quiet in the moonlight and Narl's windows glowed, and the mead had gone

round, and they talked of the future of Erl, more and more voices

joining in the tale of its coming glory, on soft feet the dogs would

come out to the sandy street and howl.



And to the high sunny nursery Lirazel would come, bringing a brightness

that the learned witch had not in all her spells, and would sing to her

boy those songs that none can sing to us here, for they were learned the

other side of the frontier of twilight and were made by singers all

unvexed by Time. And for all the marvel that there was in those songs,

whose origin was so far from the fields we know, and in times remote

from those that historians use; and though men wondered at the

strangeness of them when from open casements through the Summer days

they drifted over Erl; yet none wondered even at those as she wondered

at the earthly ways of her child and all the little human things that he

did more and more as he grew. For all human ways were strange to her.

And yet she loved him more than her father's realm, or the glittering

centuries of her ageless youth, or the palace that may be told of only

in song.



In those days Alveric learned that she would never now grow familiar

with earthly things, never understand the folk that dwelt in the valley,

never read wise books without laughter, never care for earthly ways,

never feel more at ease in the Castle of Erl than any woodland thing

that Threl might have snared and kept caged in a house. He had hoped

that soon she would learn the things that were strange to her, till the

little differences that there are between things in our fields and in

Elfland should not trouble her any more; but he saw at last that the

things that were strange would always so remain, and that all the

centuries of her timeless home had not so lightly shaped her thoughts

and fancies that they could be altered by our brief years here. When he

had learned this he had learned the truth.



Between the spirits of Alveric and Lirazel lay all the distance there is

between Earth and Elfland; and love bridged the distance, which can

bridge further than that; yet when for a moment on the golden bridge he

would pause and let his thoughts look down at the gulf, all his mind

would grow giddy and Alveric trembled. What of the end, he thought? And

feared lest it should be stranger than the beginning.



And she, she did not see that she should know anything. Was not her

beauty enough? Had not a lover come at last to those lawns that shone by

the palace only told of in song, and rescued her from her uncompanioned

fate and from that perpetual calm? Was it not enough that he had come?

Must she needs understand the curious things folk did? Must she never

dance in the road, never speak to goats, never laugh at funerals, never

sing at night? Why! What was joy for if it must be hidden? Must

merriment bow to dulness in these strange fields she had come to? And

then one day she saw how a woman of Erl looked less fair than she had

looked a year ago. Little enough was the change, but her swift eye saw

it surely. And she went to Alveric crying to be comforted, because she

feared that Time in the fields we know might have power to harm that

beauty that the long long ages of Elfland had never dared to dim. And

Alveric had said that Time must have his way, as all men know; and where

was the good of complaining?









                              CHAPTER VI



                      _The Rune of the Elf King_





On the high balcony of his gleaming tower the King of Elfland stood.

Below him echoed yet the thousand steps. He had lifted his head to chant

the rune that should hold his daughter in Elfland, and in that moment

had seen her pass the murky barrier; which on this side, facing toward

Elfland, is all lustrous with twilight, and on that side, facing towards

the fields we know, is smoky and angry and dull. And now he had dropped

his head till his beard lay mingled with his cape of ermine above his

cerulean cloak, and stood there silently sorrowful, while time passed

swift as ever over the fields we know.



And standing there all blue and white against his silver tower, aged by

the passing of times of which we know nothing, before he imposed its

eternal calm upon Elfland, he thought of his daughter amongst our

pitiless years. For he knew, whose wisdom surpassed the confines of

Elfland and touched our rugged fields, knew well the harshness of

material things and all the turmoil of Time. Even as he stood there he

knew that the years that assail beauty, and the myriad harshnesses that

vex the spirit, were already about his daughter. And the days that

remained to her now seemed scarce more to him, dwelling beyond the fret

and ruin of Time, than to us might seem a briar rose's hours when

plucked and foolishly hawked in the streets of a city. He knew that

there hung over her now the doom of all mortal things. He thought of her

perishing soon, as mortal things must; to be buried amongst the rocks of

a land that scorned Elfland and that held its most treasured myths to be

of little account. And were he not the King of all that magical land,

which held its eternal calm from his own mysterious serenity, he had

wept to think of the grave in rocky Earth gripping that form that was so

fair forever. Or else, he thought, she would pass to some paradise far

from his knowledge, some heaven of which books told in the fields we

know, for he had heard even of this. He pictured her on some

apple-haunted hill, under blossoms of an everlasting April, through

which flickered the pale gold haloes of those that had cursed Elfland.

He saw, though dimly for all his magical wisdom, the glory that only the

blessed clearly see. He saw his daughter on those heavenly hills stretch

out both arms, as he knew well she would, towards the pale-blue peaks of

her elfin home, while never one of the blessed heeded her yearning. And

then, though he was king of all that land, that had its everlasting calm

from him, he wept and all Elfland shivered. It shivered as placid water

shivers here if something suddenly touches it from our fields.



Then the King turned and left his balcony and went in great haste down

his brazen steps.



He came clanging to the ivory doors that shut the tower below, and

through them came to the throne-room of which only song may tell. And

there he took a parchment out of a coffer and a plume from some

fabulous wing, and dipping the plume into no earthly ink, wrote out a

rune on the parchment. Then raising two fingers he made the minor

enchantment whereby he summoned his guard. And no guard came.



I have said that no time passed at all in Elfland. Yet the happening of

events is in itself a manifestation of time, and no event can occur

unless time pass. Now it is thus with time in Elfland: in the eternal

beauty that dreams in that honied air nothing stirs or fades or dies,

nothing seeks its happiness in movement or change or a new thing, but

has its ecstasy in the perpetual contemplation of all the beauty that

has ever been, and which always glows over those enchanted lawns as

intense as when first created by incantation or song. Yet if the

energies of the wizard's mind arose to meet a new thing, then that power

that had laid its calm upon Elfland and held back time troubled the calm

awhile, and time for awhile shook Elfland. Cast anything into a deep

pool from a land strange to it, where some great fish dreams, and green

weeds dream, and heavy colours dream, and light sleeps; the great fish

stirs, the colours shift and change, the green weeds tremble, the light

wakes, a myriad things know slow movement and change; and soon the whole

pool is still again. It was the same when Alveric passed through the

border of twilight and right through the enchanted wood, and the King

was troubled and moved, and all Elfland trembled.



When the King saw that no guard came he looked into the wood which he

knew to be troubled, through the deep mass of the trees, that were

quivering yet with the coming of Alveric; he looked through the deeps of

the wood and the silver walls of his palace, for he looked by

enchantment, and there he saw the four knights of his guard lying

stricken upon the ground with their thick elvish blood hanging out

through slits in their armour. And he thought of the early magic whereby

he had made the eldest, with a rune all newly inspired, before he had

conquered Time. He passed out through the splendour and glow of one of

his flashing portals, and over a gleaming lawn and came to the fallen

guard, and saw the trees still troubled.



"There has been magic here," said the King of Elfland.



And then though he only had three runes that could do such a thing, and

though they only could be uttered once, and one was already written upon

parchment to bring his daughter home, he uttered the second of his most

magical runes over that elder knight that his magic had made long ago.

And in the silence that followed the last words of the rune the rents in

the moon-bright armour all clicked shut at once, and the thick dark

blood was gone and the knight rose live to his feet. And the Elf King

now had only one rune left that was mightier than any magic we know.



The other three knights lay dead; and, having no souls, their magic

returned again to the mind of their master.



He went back then to his palace, while he sent the last of his guard to

fetch him a troll.



Dark brown of skin and two or three feet high the trolls are a gnomish

tribe that inhabit Elfland. And soon there was a scamper in the

throne-room that may only be told of in song, and a troll lit by the

throne on its two bare feet and stood before its king. The King gave it

the parchment with the rune written thereon, saying: "Scamper hence, and

pass over the end of the Land, until you come to the fields that none

know here; and find the Princess Lirazel who is gone to the haunts of

men, and give her this rune and she shall read it and all shall be

well."



And the troll scampered thence.



And soon the troll was come with long leaps to the frontier of twilight.

Then nothing moved in Elfland any more; and motionless on that splendid

throne of which only song may speak sat the old King mourning in

silence.









                              CHAPTER VII



                       _The Coming of the Troll_





When the troll came to the frontier of twilight he skipped nimbly

through; yet he emerged cautiously into the fields we know, for he was

afraid of dogs. Slipping quietly out of those dense masses of twilight

he came so softly into our fields that no eye had seen him unless it

were gazing already at the spot at which he appeared. There he paused

for some instants, looking to left and right; and, seeing no dogs, he

left the barrier of twilight. This troll had never before been in the

fields we know, yet he knew well to avoid dogs, for the fear of dogs is

so deep and universal amongst all that are less than Man, that it seems

to have passed even beyond our boundaries and to have been felt in

Elfland.



In our fields it was now May, and the buttercups stretched away before

the troll, a world of yellow mingled with the brown of the budding

grasses. When he saw so many buttercups shining there the wealth of

Earth astonished him. And soon he was moving through them, yellowing his

shins as he went.



He had not gone far from Elfland when he met with a hare, who was lying

in a comfortable arrangement of grass, in which he had intended to pass

the time till he should have things to see to.



When the hare saw the troll he sat there without any movement whatever,

and without any expression in his eyes, and did nothing at all but

think.



When the troll saw the hare he skipped nearer, and lay down before it in

the buttercups, and asked it the way to the haunts of men. And the hare

went on thinking.



"Thing of these fields," repeated the troll, "where are the haunts of

men?"



The hare got up then and walked towards the troll, which made the hare

look very ridiculous, for he had none of the grace while walking that he

has when he runs or gambols, and was much lower in front than behind. He

put his nose into the troll's face and twitched foolish whiskers.



"Tell me the way," said the troll.



When the hare perceived that the troll did not smell of anything like

dog he was content to let the troll question him. But he did not

understand the language of Elfland, so he lay still again and thought

while the troll talked.



And at last the troll wearied of getting no answer, so he leaped up and

shouted "Dogs!" and left the hare and scampered away merrily over the

buttercups, taking any direction that led away from Elfland. And though

the hare could not quite understand elvish language, yet there was a

vehemence in the tone in which the troll had shouted Dogs which caused

apprehension to enter the thoughts of the hare, so that very soon he

forsook his arrangement of grass, and lollopped away through the meadow

with one scornful look after the troll; but he did not go very fast,

going mostly on three legs, with one hind leg all ready to let down if

there should really be dogs. And soon he paused and sat up and put up

his ears, and looked across the buttercups and thought deeply. And

before the hare had ceased to ponder the troll's meaning the troll was

far out of sight and had forgotten what he had said.



And soon he saw the gables of a farm-house rise up beyond a hedge. They

seemed to look at him with little windows up under red tiles. "A haunt

of man," said the troll. And yet some elvish instinct seemed to tell him

that it was not here that Princess Lirazel had come. Still, he went

nearer the farm and began to gaze at its poultry. But just at that

moment a dog saw him, one that had never seen a troll before, and it

uttered one canine cry of astonished indignation, and keeping all the

rest of its breath for the chase, sped after the troll.



The troll began at once to rise and dip over the buttercups as though he

had almost borrowed its speed from the swallow and were riding the lower

air. Such speed was new to the dog, and he went in a long curve after

the troll, leaning over as he went, his mouth open and silent, the wind

rippling all the way from his nose to his tail in one wavy current. The

curve was made by the dog's baffled hopes to catch the troll as he

slanted across. Soon he was straight behind; and the troll toyed with

speed; breathing the flowery air in long fresh draughts above the tops

of the buttercups. He thought no more of the dog, but he did not cease

in the flight that the dog had caused, because of the joy of the speed.

And this strange chase continued over those fields, the troll driven on

by joy and the dog by duty. For the sake of novelty then the troll put

his feet together as he leaped over the flowers and, alighting with

rigid knees, fell forwards on to his hands and so turned over; and,

straightening his elbows suddenly as he turned, shot himself into the

air still turning over and over. He did this several times, increasing

the indignation of the dog, who knew well enough that that was no way to

go over the fields we know. But for all his indignation the dog had seen

clear enough that he would never catch that troll, and presently he

returned to the farm, and found his master there and went up to him

wagging his tail. So hard he wagged it that the farmer was sure he had

done some useful thing, and patted him, and there the matter ended.



And it was well enough for the farmer that his dog has chased that troll

from his farm; for had it communicated to his livestock any of the

wonder of Elfland they would have mocked at Man, and that farmer would

have lost the allegiance of all but his staunch dog.



And the troll went on gaily over the tips of the buttercups.



Presently he saw rising up all white over the flowers a fox that was

facing him with his white chest and chin, and watching the troll as it

went. The troll went near to him and took a look. And the fox went on

watching him, for the fox watches all things.



He had come back lately to those dewy fields from slinking by night

along the boundary of twilight that lies between here and Elfland. He

even prowls inside the very boundary, walking amongst the twilight; and

it is in the mystery of that heavy twilight that lies between here and

there that there clings to him some of that glamour that he brings with

him to our fields.



"Well, Noman's Dog," said the troll. For they know the fox in Elfland,

from seeing him often go dimly along their borders; and this is the name

they give him.



"Well, Thing-over-the-Border," said the fox when he answered at all. For

he knew troll-talk.



"Are the haunts of men near here?" said the troll.



The fox moved his whiskers by slightly wrinkling his lip. Like all liars

he reflected before he spoke, and sometimes even let wise silences do

better than speech.



"Men live here and men live there," said the fox.



"I want their haunts," said the troll.



"What for?" said the fox.



"I have a message from the King of Elfland."



The fox showed no respect or fear at the mention of that dread name, but

slightly moved his head and eyes to conceal the awe that he felt.



"If it is a message," he said, "their haunts are over there." And he

pointed with his long thin nose towards Erl.



"How shall I know when I get there?" said the troll.



"By the smell," said the fox. "It is a big haunt of men, and the smell

is dreadful."



"Thanks, Noman's Dog," said the troll. And he seldom thanked anyone.



"I should never go near them," said the fox, "but for ..." And he paused

and reflected silently.



"But for what?" said the troll.



"But for their poultry." And he fell into a grave silence.



"Good-bye, Noman's Dog," said the troll and turned head-over-heels, and

was off on his way to Erl.



Passing over the buttercups all through the dewy morning the troll was

far on his way by the afternoon, and saw before evening the smoke and

the towers of Erl. It was all sunk in a hollow; and gables and chimneys

and towers peered over the lip of the valley, and smoke hung over them

on the dreamy air. "The haunts of men," said the troll. Then he sat

down amongst the grasses and looked at it.



Presently he went nearer and looked at it again. He did not like the

look of the smoke and that crowd of gables: certainly it smelt

dreadfully. There had been some legend in Elfland of the wisdom of Man;

and whatever respect that legend had gained for us in the light mind of

the troll now all blew lightly away as he looked at the crowded houses.

And as he looked at them there passed a child of four, a small girl on a

footpath over the fields, going home in the evening to Erl. They looked

at each other with round eyes.



"Hullo," said the child.



"Hullo, Child of Men," said the troll.



He was not speaking troll-talk now, but the language of Elfland, that

grander tongue that he had had to speak when he was before the King: for

he knew the language of Elfland although it was never used in the homes

of the trolls, who preferred troll-talk. This language was spoken in

those days also by men, for there were fewer languages then, and the

elves and the people of Erl both used the same.



"What are you?" said the child.



"A troll of Elfland," answered the troll.



"So I thought," said the child.



"Where are you going, child of men?" the troll asked.



"To the houses," the child replied.



"We don't want to go there," said the troll.



"N-no," said the child.



"Come to Elfland," the troll said.



The child thought for awhile. Other children had gone, and the elves

always sent a changeling in their place, so that nobody quite missed

them and nobody really knew. She thought awhile of the wonder and

wildness of Elfland, and then of her own home.



"N-no," said the child.



"Why not?" said the troll.



"Mother made a jam roll this morning," said the child. And she walked on

gravely home. Had it not been for that chance jam roll she had gone to

Elfland.



"Jam!" said the troll contemptuously and thought of the tarns of

Elfland, the great lily-leaves lying flat upon their solemn waters, the

huge blue lilies towering into the elf-light above the green deep tarns:

for jam this child had forsaken them!



Then he thought of his duty again, the roll of parchment and the Elf

King's rune for his daughter. He had carried the parchment in his left

hand when he ran, in his mouth when he somersaulted over the buttercups.

Was the Princess here he thought? Or were there other haunts of men? As

evening drew in he crept nearer and nearer the homes, to hear without

being seen.









                             CHAPTER VIII



                       _The Arrival of the Rune_





On a sunny May morning in Erl the witch Ziroonderel sat in the castle

nursery by the fire, cooking a meal for the baby. The boy was now three

years old, and still Lirazel had not named him; for she feared lest some

jealous spirit of Earth or air should hear the name, and if so she would

not say what she feared then. And Alveric had said he must be named.



And the boy could bowl a hoop; for the witch had gone one misty night to

her hill and had brought him a moon-halo which she got by enchantment at

moonrise, and had hammered it into a hoop, and had made him a little rod

of thunderbolt-iron with which to beat it along.



And now the boy was waiting for his breakfast; and there was a spell

across the threshold to keep the nursery snug, which Ziroonderel had put

there with a wave of her ebon stick, and it kept out rats and mice and

dogs, nor could bats sail across it, and the watchful nursery cat it

kept at home: no lock that blacksmiths made was any stronger.



Suddenly over the threshold and over the spell the troll jumped

somersaulting through the air and came down sitting. The crude wooden

nursery-clock hanging over the fire stopped its loud tick as he came;

for he bore with him a little charm against time, with strange grass

round one of his fingers, that he might not be withered away in the

fields we know. For well the Elf King knew the flight of our hours: four

years had swept over these fields of ours while he had boomed down his

brazen steps and sent for his troll and given him that spell to bind

round one of his fingers.



"What's this?" said Ziroonderel.



That troll knew well when to be impudent, but looking in the witch's

eyes saw something to be afraid of; and well he might, for those eyes

had looked in the Elf King's own. Therefore he played, as we say in

these fields, his best card, and answered: "A message from the King of

Elfland."



"Is that so?" said the old witch. "Yes, yes," she added more lowly to

herself, "that would be for my lady. Yes, that would come."



The troll sat still on the floor fingering the roll of parchment inside

of which was written the rune of the King of Elfland. Then over the end

of his bed, as he waited for breakfast, the baby saw the troll, and

asked him who he was and where he came from and what he was able to do.

When the baby asked him what he was able to do the troll jumped up and

skipped about the room like a moth on a lamp-lit ceiling. From floor to

shelves and back and up again he went with leaps like flying; the baby

clapped his hands, the cat was furious; the witch raised her ebon stick

and made a charm against leaping, but it could not hold the troll. He

leaped and bounced and bounded, while the cat hissed all the curses that

the feline language knows, and Ziroonderel was wrath not only because

her magic was thwarted, but because with mere human alarm she feared for

her cups and saucers; and the baby shouted all the while for more. And

all at once the troll remembered his errand and the dread parchment he

bore.



"Where is the Princess Lirazel?" he said to the witch.



And the witch pointed the way to the princess's tower; for she knew that

there were no means nor power she had by which to hinder a rune from the

King of Elfland. And as the troll turned to go Lirazel entered the room.

He bowed all low before this great lady of Elfland and, with all his

impudence in a moment lost, kneeled on one knee before the blaze of her

beauty and presented the Elf King's rune. The boy was shouting to his

mother to demand more leaps from the troll, as she took the scroll in

her hand; the cat with her back to a box was watching alertly;

Ziroonderel was all silent.



And then the troll thought of the weed-green tarns of Elfland in the

woods that the trolls knew; he thought of the wonder of the unwithering

flowers that time has never touched; the deep, deep colour and the

perpetual calm: his errand was over and he was weary of Earth.



For a moment nothing moved there but the baby, shouting for new troll

antics and waving his arms: Lirazel stood with the elfin scroll in her

hand, the troll knelt before her, the witch never stirred, the cat stood

watching fiercely, even the clock was still. Then the Princess moved and

the troll rose to his feet, the witch sighed and the cat gave up her

watchfulness as the troll scampered away. And though the baby shouted

for the troll to return it never heeded, but twisted down the long

spiral stairs, and slipping out through a door was off towards Elfland.

As the troll passed over the threshold the wooden clock ticked again.



Lirazel looked at the scroll and looked at her boy, and did not unroll

the parchment, but turned and carried it away, and came to her chamber

and locked the scroll in a casket, and left it there unread. For her

fears told her well the most potent rune of her father, that she had

dreaded so much as she fled from his silver tower and heard his feet go

booming up the brass, had crossed the frontier of twilight written upon

the scroll, and would meet her eyes the moment she unrolled it and waft

her thence.



When the rune was safe in the casket she went to Alveric to tell him of

the peril that had come near her. But Alveric was troubled because she

would not name the baby, and asked her at once about this. And so she

suggested a name at last to him; and it was one that no one in these

fields could pronounce, an elvish name full of wonder, and made of

syllables like birds' cries at night: Alveric would have none of it. And

her whim in this came, as all the whims she had, from no customary thing

of these fields of ours, but sheer over the border from Elfland, sheer

over the border with all wild fancies that rarely visit our fields. And

Alveric was vexed with these whims, for there had been none like them of

old in the Castle of Erl: none could interpret them to him and none

advise him. He looked for her to be guided by old customs; she looked

only for some wild fancy to come from the south-east. He reasoned with

her with the human reason that folk set much store by here, but she did

not want reason. And so when they parted she had not after all told

anything of the peril that had sought her from Elfland, which she had

come to Alveric to tell.



She went instead to her tower and looked at the casket, shining there in

the low late light; and turned from it and often looked again; while

the light went under the fields and the gloaming came, and all glimmered

away. She sat then by the casement open towards eastern hills, above

whose darkening curves she watched the stars. She watched so long that

she saw them change their places. For more than all things else that she

had seen since she came to these fields of ours she had wondered at the

stars. She loved their gentle beauty; and yet she was sad as she looked

wistfully to them, for Alveric had said that she must not worship them.



How if she might not worship them could she give them their due, could

she thank them for their beauty, could she praise their joyful calm? And

then she thought of her baby: then she saw Orion: then she defied all

jealous spirits of air, and, looking toward Orion, whom she must never

worship, she offered her baby's days to that belted hunter, naming her

baby after those splendid stars.



And when Alveric came to the tower she told him of her wish, and he was

willing the boy should be named Orion, for all in that valley set much

store by hunting. And the hope came back to Alveric, which he would not

put away, that being reasonable at last in this, she would now be

reasonable in all other things, and be guided by custom, and do what

others did, and forsake wild whims and fancies that came over the border

from Elfland. And he asked her to worship the holy things of the Freer.

For never had she given any of these things their due, and knew not

which was the holier, his candlestick or his bell, and never would learn

for ought that Alveric told her.



And now she answered him pleasantly and her husband thought all was

well, but her thoughts were far with Orion; nor did they ever tarry with

grave things long, nor could tarry longer amongst them than butterflies

do in the shade.



All that night the casket was locked on the rune of the King of Elfland.



And next morning Lirazel gave little thought to the rune, for they went

with the boy to the holy place of the Freer; and Ziroonderel came with

them but waited without. And the folk of Erl came too, as many as could

leave the affairs of man with the fields; and all were there of those

that had made the parliament, when they went to Alveric's sire in the

long red room. And all of these were glad when they saw the boy and

marked his strength and growth; and, muttering low together as they

stood in the holy place, they foretold how all should be as they had

planned. And the Freer came forth and, standing amongst his holy things,

he gave to the boy before him the name of Orion, though he sooner had

given some name of those that he knew to be blessed. And he rejoiced to

see the boy and to name him there; for by the family that dwelt in the

Castle of Erl all these folk marked the generations, and watched the

ages pass, as sometimes we watch the seasons go over some old known

tree. And he bowed himself before Alveric, and was full courteous to

Lirazel, yet his courtesy to the princess came not from his heart, for

in his heart he held her in no more reverence than he held a mermaid

that had forsaken the sea.



And the boy came even so by the name of Orion. And all the folk rejoiced

as he came out with his parents and rejoined Ziroonderel at the edge of

the holy garden. And Alveric, Lirazel, Ziroonderel and Orion all walked

back to the castle.



And all that day Lirazel did nothing that caused anybody to wonder, but

let herself be governed by custom and the ways of the fields we know.

Only, when the stars came out and Orion shone, she knew that their

splendour had not received its due, and her gratitude to Orion yearned

to be said. She was grateful for his bright beauty that cheered our

fields, and grateful for his protection, of which she felt sure for her

boy, against jealous spirits of air. And all her unsaid thanks so burned

in her heart that all of a sudden she rose and left her tower and went

out to the open starlight, and lifted her face to the stars and the

place of Orion, and stood all dumb though her thanks were trembling upon

her lips; for Alveric had told her one must not pray to the stars. With

face upturned to all that wandering host she stood long silent, obedient

to Alveric: then she lowered her eyes, and there was a small pool

glimmering in the night, in which all the faces of the stars were

shining. "To pray to the stars," she said to herself in the night, "is

surely wrong. These images in the water are not the stars. I will pray

to their images, and the stars will know."



And on her knees amongst the iris leaves she prayed at the edge of the

pool, and gave thanks to the images of the stars for the joy she had had

of the night, when the constellations shone in their myriad majesty, and

moved like an army dressed in silver mail, marching from unknown

victories to conquer in distant wars. She blessed and thanked and

praised those bright reflections shimmering down in the pool, and bade

them tell her thanks and her praise to Orion, to whom she might not

pray. It was thus that Alveric found her, kneeling, bent down in the

dark, and reproached her bitterly. She was worshipping the stars, he

said, which were there for no such purpose. And she said she was only

supplicating their images.



We may understand his feelings easily: the strangeness of her, her

unexpected acts, her contrariness to all established things, her scorn

for custom, her wayward ignorance, jarred on some treasured tradition

every day. The more romantic she had been far away over the frontier, as

told of by legend and song, the more difficult it was for her to fill

any place once held by the ladies of that castle who were versed in all

the lore of the fields we know. And Alveric looked for her to fulfil

duties and follow customs which were all as new to her as the twinkling

stars.



But Lirazel felt only that the stars had not their due, and that custom

or reason or whatever men set store by should demand that thanks be

given them for their beauty; and she had not thanked them even, but had

supplicated only their images in the pool.



That night she thought of Elfland, where all things were matched with

her beauty, where nothing changed and there were no strange customs, and

no strange magnificences like these stars of ours to whom none gave

their due. She thought of the elfin lawns and the towering banks of the

flowers, and the palace that may not be told of but only in song.



Still locked in the dark of the casket the rune bided its time.









                              CHAPTER IX



                         _Lirazel Blows Away_





And the days went by, the Summer passed over Erl, the sun that had

travelled northward fared South again, it was near to the time when the

swallows left those eaves, and Lirazel had not learnt anything. She had

not prayed to the stars again, or supplicated their images, but she had

learned no human customs, and could not see why her love and gratitude

must remain unexpressed to the stars. And Alveric did not know that the

time must come when some simple trivial thing would divide them utterly.



And then one day, hoping still, he took her with him to the house of the

Freer to teach her how to worship his holy things. And gladly the good

man brought his candle and bell, and the eagle of brass that held up his

book when he read, and a little symbolic bowl that had scented water,

and the silver snuffers that put his candle out. And he told her clearly

and simply, as he had told her before, the origin, meaning and mystery

of all these things, and why the bowl was of brass and the snuffer of

silver, and what the symbols were that were carved on the bowl. With

fitting courtesy he told her these things, even with kindness; and yet

there was something in his voice as he told, a little distant from her;

and she knew that he spoke as one that walked safe on shore calling far

to a mermaid amid dangerous seas.



As they came back to the castle the swallows were grouped to go, sitting

in lines along the battlements. And Lirazel had promised to worship the

holy things of the Freer, like the simple bell-fearing folk of the

valley of Erl: and a late hope was shining in Alveric's mind that even

yet all was well. And for many days she remembered all that the Freer

had told her.



And one day walking late from the nursery, past tall windows to her

tower, and looking out on the evening, remembering that she must not

worship the stars, she called to mind the holy things of the Freer, and

tried to remember all she was told of them. It seemed so hard to worship

them just as she should. She knew that before many hours the swallows

would all be gone; and often when they left her her mood would change;

and she feared that she might forget, and never remember more, how she

ought to worship the holy things of the Freer.



So she went out into the night again over the grasses to where a thin

brook ran, and drew out some great flat pebbles that she knew where to

find, turning her face away from the images of the stars. By day the

stones shone beautifully in the water, all ruddy and mauve; now they

were all dark. She drew them out and laid them in the meadow: she loved

these smooth flat stones, for somehow they made her remember the rocks

of Elfland.



She laid them all in a row, this for the candlestick, this for the bell,

that for the holy bowl. "If I can worship these lovely stones as things

ought to be worshipped," she said, "I can worship the things of the

Freer."



Then she kneeled down before the big flat stones and prayed to them as

though they were Christom things.



And Alveric seeking her in the wide night, wondering what wild fancy had

carried her whither, heard her voice in the meadow, crooning such

prayers as are offered to holy things.



When he saw the four flat stones to which she prayed, bowed down before

them in the grass, he said that no worse than this were the darkest ways

of the heathen. And she said "I am learning to worship the holy things

of the Freer."



"It is the art of the heathen," he said.



Now of all things that men feared in the valley of Erl they feared most

the arts of the heathen, of whom they knew nothing but that their ways

were dark. And he spoke with the anger which men always used when they

spoke there of the heathen. And his anger went to her heart, for she was

but learning to worship his holy things to please him, and yet he had

spoken like this.



And Alveric would not speak the words that should have been said, to

turn aside anger and soothe her; for no man, he foolishly thought,

should compromise in matters touching on heathenesse. So Lirazel went

alone all sadly back to her tower. And Alveric stayed to cast the four

flat stones afar.



And the swallows left, and unhappy days went by. And one day Alveric

bade her worship the holy things of the Freer, and she had quite

forgotten how. And he spoke again of the arts of heathenesse. The day

was shining and the poplars golden and all the aspens red.



Then Lirazel went to her tower and opened the casket, that shone in the

morning with the clear autumnal light, and took in her hand the rune of

the King of Elfland, and carried it with her across the high vaulted

hall, and came to another tower and climbed its steps to the nursery.



And there all day she stayed and played with her child, with the scroll

still tight in her hand: and, merrily though she played at whiles, yet

there were strange calms in her eyes, which Ziroonderel watched while

she wondered. And when the sun was low and she had put the child to bed

she sat beside him all solemn as she told him childish tales. And

Ziroonderel, the wise witch, watched; and for all her wisdom only

guessed how it would be, and knew not how to make it otherwise.



And before sunset Lirazel kissed the boy and unrolled the Elf King's

scroll. It was but a petulance that had made her take it from the coffer

in which it lay, and the petulance might have passed and she might not

have unrolled the scroll, only that it was there in her hand. Partly

petulance, partly wonder, partly whims too idle to name, drew her eyes

to the Elf King's words in their coal-black curious characters.



And whatever magic there was in the rune of which I cannot tell (and

dreadful magic there was), the rune was written with love that was

stronger than magic, till those mystical characters glowed with the love

that the Elf King had for his daughter, and there were blended in that

mighty rune two powers, magic and love, the greatest power there is

beyond the boundary of twilight with the greatest power there is in the

fields we know. And if Alveric's love could have held her he should have

trusted alone to that love, for the Elf King's rune was mightier than

the holy things of the Freer.



No sooner had Lirazel read the rune on the scroll than fancies from

Elfland began to pour over the border. Some came that would make a

clerk in the City to-day leave his desk at once to dance on the

sea-shore; and some would have driven all the men in a bank to leave

doors and coffers open and wander away till they came to green open land

and the heathery hills; and some would have made a poet of a man, all of

a sudden as he sat at his business. They were mighty fancies that the

Elf King summoned by the force of his magical rune. And Lirazel sat

there with the rune in her hand, helpless amongst this mass of

tumultuous fancies from Elfland. And as the fancies raged and sang and

called, more and more over the border, all crowding on one poor mind,

her body grew lighter and lighter. Her feet half rested half floated,

upon the floor; Earth scarcely held her down, so fast was she becoming a

thing of dreams. No love of hers for Earth, or of the children of Earth

for her, had any longer power to hold her there.



And now came memories of her ageless childhood beside the tarns of

Elfland, by the deep forest's border, by those delirious lawns, or in

the palace that may not be told of except only in song. She saw those

things as clearly as we see small shells in water, looking through clear

ice down to the floor of some sleeping lake, a little dimmed in that

other region across the barrier of ice; so too her memories shone a

little dimly from across the frontier of Elfland. Little queer sounds of

elfin creatures came to her, scents swam from those miraculous flowers

that glowed by the lawns she knew, faint sounds of enchanted songs blew

over the border and reached her seated there, voices and melodies and

memories came floating through the twilight, all Elfland was calling.

Then measured and resonant, and strangely near, she heard her father's

voice.



She rose at once, and now Earth had lost on her the grip that it only

has on material things, and a thing of dreams and fancy and fable and

phantasy she drifted from the room; and Ziroonderel had no power to hold

her with any spell, nor had she herself the power even to turn, even to

look at her boy as she drifted away.



And at that moment a wind came out of the north-west, and entered the

woods and bared the golden branches, and danced on over the downs, and

led a company of scarlet and golden leaves, that had dreaded this day

but danced now it had come; and away with a riot of dancing and glory of

colour, high in the light of the sun that had set from the sight of the

fields, went wind and leaves together. With them went Lirazel.









                               CHAPTER X



                        _The Ebbing of Elfland_





Next morning Alveric came up the tower to the witch Ziroonderel, weary

and frantic from searching all night long in strange places for Lirazel.

All night he had tried to guess what fancy had beckoned her out and

whither it might have led her; he had searched by the stream by which

she had prayed to the stones, and the pool where she prayed to the

stars; he had called her name up every tower, and had called it wide in

the dark, and had had no answer but echo; and so he had come at last to

the witch Ziroonderel.



"Whither?" he said, saying no more than that, that the boy might not

know his fears. Yet Orion knew.



And Ziroonderel all mournfully shook her head. "The way of the leaves,"

she said. "The way of all beauty."



But Alveric did not stay to hear her say more than her first five words;

for he went with the restlessness with which he had come, straight from

the room and hastily down the stair, and out at once into the windy

morning, to see which way those glorious leaves were gone.



And a few leaves that had clung to cold branches longer, when the gay

company of their comrades had gone, were now too on the air, going

lonely and last: and Alveric saw they were going south-east towards

Elfland.



Hurriedly then he donned his magical sword in its wide scabbard of

leather; and with scanty provisions hastened over the fields, after the

last of the leaves, whose autumnal glory led him, as many a cause in its

latter days, all splendid and fallen, leads all manner of men.



And so he came to the upland fields with their grass all grey with dew;

and the air was all sparkling with sunlight, and gay with the last of

the leaves, but a melancholy seemed to dwell with the sound of the

lowing of cattle.



In the calm bright morning with the north-west wind roaming through it

Alveric came by no calm, and never gave up the haste of one who has lost

something suddenly: he had the swift movements of such, and the frantic

air. He watched all day over clear wide horizons, south-east where the

leaves were leading; and at evening he looked to see the Elfin

Mountains, severe and changeless, unlit by any light we know, the colour

of pale forget-me-nots. He held on restlessly to see their summits, but

never they came to view.



And then he saw the house of the old leather-worker who had made the

scabbard for his sword; and the sight of it brought back to him the

years that were gone since the evening when first he had seen it,

although he never knew how many they were, and could not know, for no

one has ever devised any exact calculation whereby to estimate the

action of time in Elfland. Then he looked once more for the pale-blue

Elfin Mountains, remembering well where they lay, in their long grave

row past a point of one of the leather-worker's gables, but he saw never

a line of them. Then he entered the house and the old man still was

there.



The leather-worker was wonderfully aged; even the table on which he

worked was much older. He greeted Alveric, remembering who he was, and

Alveric enquired for the old man's wife. "She died long ago," he said.

And again Alveric felt the baffling flight of those years, which added a

fear to Elfland whither he went, yet he neither thought to turn back nor

reined for a moment his impatient haste. He said a few formal things of

the old man's loss that had happened so long ago. Then "Where are the

Elfin Mountains," he asked, "the pale-blue peaks?"



A look came slowly over the old man's face as though he had never seen

them, as though Alveric being learned spoke of something that the old

leather-worker could not know. No, he did not know, he said. And Alveric

found that to-day as all those years ago, this old man still refused to

speak of Elfland. Well, the boundary was only a few yards away; he would

cross it and ask the way of elfin creatures, if he could not see the

mountains to guide him then. The old man offered him food, and he had

not eaten all day; but Alveric in his haste only asked him once more of

Elfland, and the old man humbly said that of such things he knew

nothing. Then Alveric strode away and came to the field he knew, which

he remembered to be divided by the nebulous border of twilight. And

indeed he had no sooner come to the field than he saw all the toadstools

leaning over one way, and that the way he was going; for just as thorn

trees all lean away from the sea, so toadstools and every plant that has

any touch of mystery, such as foxgloves, mulleins and certain kinds of

orchis, when growing anywhere near it, all lean towards Elfland. By this

one may know before one has heard a murmur of waves, or before one has

guessed an influence of magical things, that one comes, as the case may

be, to the sea or the border of Elfland. And in the air above him

Alveric saw golden birds, and guessed that there had been a storm in

Elfland blowing them over the border from the south-east, though a

north-west wind blew over the fields we know. And he went on but the

boundary was not there, and he crossed the field as any field we know,

and still he had not come to the fells of Elfland.



Then Alveric pressed on with a new impatience, with the north-west wind

behind him. And the Earth began to grow bare and shingly and dull,

without flowers, without shade, without colour, with none of those

things that there are in remembered lands, by which we build pictures of

them when we are there no more; it was all disenchanted now. Alveric saw

a golden bird high up, rushing away to the south-east; and he followed

his flight hoping soon to see the mountains of Elfland, which he

supposed to be merely concealed by some magical mist.



But still the autumnal sky was bright and clear, and all the horizon

plain, and still there came never a gleam of the Elfin Mountains. And

not from this did he learn that Elfland had ebbed. But when he saw on

that desolate shingly plain, untorn by the north-west wind but blooming

fair in the Autumn, a may tree that he remembered a long while since,

all white with blossom that once rejoiced a Spring day far in his

childhood, then he knew that Elfland had been there and must have

receded, although he knew not how far. For it is true, and Alveric

knew, that just as the glamour that brightens much of our lives,

especially in early years, comes from rumours that reach us from Elfland

by various messengers (on whom be blessings and peace), so there returns

from our fields to Elfland again, to become a part of its mystery, all

manner of little memories that we have lost and little devoted toys that

were treasured once. And this is part of the law of ebb and flow that

science may trace in all things; thus light grew the forest of coal, and

the coal gives back light; thus rivers fill the sea, and the sea sends

back to the rivers; thus all things give that receive; even Death.



Next Alveric saw lying there on the flat dry ground a toy that he yet

remembered, which years and years ago (how could he say how many?) had

been a childish joy to him, crudely carved out of wood; and one unlucky

day it had been broken, and one unhappy day it had been thrown away. And

now he saw it lying there not merely new and unbroken, but with a wonder

about it, a splendour and a romance, the radiant transfigured thing that

his young fancy had known. It lay there forsaken of Elfland as wonderful

things of the sea lie sometimes desolate on wastes of sand, when the sea

is a far blue bulk with a border of foam.



Dreary with lost romance was the plain from which Elfland had gone,

though here and there Alveric saw again and again those little forsaken

things that had been lost from his childhood, dropping through time to

the ageless and hourless region of Elfland to be a part of its glory,

and now left forlorn by this immense withdrawal. Old tunes, old songs,

old voices, hummed there too, growing fainter and fainter, as though

they could not live long in the fields we know.



And, when the sun set, a mauve-rose glow in the East, that Alveric

fancied a little too gorgeous for Earth, led him onward still; for he

deemed it to be the reflection cast on the sky by the glow of the

splendour of Elfland. So he went on hoping to find it, horizon after

horizon; and night came on with all Earth's comrade stars. And only then

Alveric put aside at last that frantic restlessness that had driven him

since the morning; and, wrapping himself in a loose cloak that he wore,

ate such food as he had in a satchel, and slept a troubled sleep alone

with other forsaken things.



At the earliest moment of dawn his impatience awoke him, although one of

October's mists hid all glimpses of light. He ate the last of his food

and then pushed on through the greyness.



No sound from the things of our fields came to him now; for men never

went that way when Elfland was there, and none but Alveric went now to

that desolate plain. He had travelled beyond the sound of cock-crow from

the comfortable houses of men and was now marching through a curious

silence, broken only now and then by the small dim cries of the lost

songs that had been left by the ebb of Elfland and were fainter now than

they had been the day before. And when dawn shone Alveric saw again so

great a splendour in the sky, glowing all green low down in the

south-east, that he thought once more he saw a reflection from Elfland,

and pressed on hoping to find it over the next horizon. And he passed

the next horizon; and still that shingly plain, and never a peak of the

pale-blue Elfin Mountains.



Whether Elfland always lay over the next horizon, brightening the clouds

with its glow, and moved away just as he came, or whether it had gone

days or years before, he did not know but still kept on and on. And he

came at last to a dry and grassless ridge on which his eyes and his

hopes had been set for long, and from it he looked far over the desolate

flatness that stretched to the rim of the sky, and saw never a sign of

Elfland, never a slope of the mountains: even the little treasures of

memory that had been left behind by the ebb were withering into things

of our every day. Then Alveric drew his magical sword from its sheath.

But though that sword had power against enchantment it had not been

given the power to bring again an enchantment that was gone; and the

desolate land remained the same, for all that he waved his sword, stony,

deserted, unromantic and wide.



For a little while he went on; but in that flat land the horizon moved

imperceptibly with him, and never a peak appeared of the Elfin

Mountains; and on that dreary plain he soon discovered, as sooner or

later many a man must, that he had lost Elfland.









                              CHAPTER XI



                        _The Deep of the Woods_





In those days Ziroonderel would amuse the boy by charms and by little

wonders, and he was content for a while. And then he began to guess for

himself, all in silence, where his mother was. He listened to all things

said, and thought long about them. And days passed thus and he only knew

she had gone, and still he said never a word of the thing with which his

thoughts were busy. And then he came to know from things said or unsaid,

or from looks or glances or wagging of heads, that there was a wonder

about his mother's going. But what the wonder was he could not find, for

all the marvels that crossed his mind when he guessed. And at last one

day he asked Ziroonderel.



And stored though her old mind was with ages and ages of wisdom, and

though she had feared this question, yet she did not know it had dwelt

in his mind for days, and could find no better answer out of her wisdom

than that his mother had gone to the woods. When the boy heard this he

determined to go to the woods to find her.



Now in his walks abroad with Ziroonderel through the little hamlet of

Erl, Orion would see the villagers walking by and the smith at his open

forge, and folk in their doorways, and men that came in to the market

from distant fields; and he knew them all. And most of all he knew Threl

with his quiet feet, and Oth with his lithe limbs; for both of these

would tell him tales when they met of the uplands, and the deep woods

over the hill; and Orion on little journeys with his nurse loved to hear

tales of far places.



There was an ancient myrtle tree by a well, where Ziroonderel would sit

in the Summer evenings while Orion played on the grass; and Oth would

cross the grass with his curious bow, going out in the evening, and

sometimes Threl would come; and every time that one of them came Orion

would stop him and ask for a tale of the woods. And if it were Oth he

would bow to Ziroonderel with a look of awe as he bowed, and would tell

some tale of what the deer did, and Orion would ask him why. Then a look

would come over Oth's face as though he were carefully remembering

things that had happened very long ago, and after some moments of

silence he would give the ancient cause of whatever the deer did, which

explained how they came by the custom.



If it were Threl that came across the grass he would appear not to see

Ziroonderel and would tell his tale of the woods more hastily in a low

voice and pass on, leaving the evening, as Orion felt, full of mystery

behind him. He would tell tales of all manner of creatures; and the

tales were so strange that he told them only to young Orion, because, as

he explained, there were many folk that were unable to believe the

truth, and he did not wish his tales to come to the ears of such. Once

Orion had gone to his house, a dark hut full of skins: all kinds of

skins hung on the wall, foxes, badgers, and martens; and there were

smaller ones in heaps in the corners. To Orion Threl's dark hut was more

full of wonder than any other house he had ever seen.



But now it was Autumn and the boy and his nurse saw Oth and Threl more

seldom; for in the misty evenings with the threat of frost in the air

they sat no longer by the myrtle tree. Yet Orion watched on their short

walks; and one day he saw Threl going away from the village with his

face to the uplands. And he called to Threl, and Threl stood still with

a certain air of confusion, for he deemed himself of too little account

to be clearly seen and noticed by the nurse at the castle, be she witch

or woman. And Orion ran up to him and said "Show me the woods." And

Ziroonderel perceived that the time had come when his thoughts were

roaming beyond the lip of the valley, and knew that no spell of hers

would hold him long from following after them. And Threl said, "No, my

Master," and looked uneasily at Ziroonderel, who came after the boy and

led him away from Threl. And Threl went on alone to his work in the deep

of the woods.



And it was not otherwise than the witch had foreseen. For first Orion

wept, and then he dreamed of the woods, and next day he slipped away

alone to the house of Oth and asked him to take him with him when he

went to hunt the deer. And Oth, standing on a wide deer-skin in front of

blazing logs, spoke much of the woods, but did not take him then.

Instead he brought Orion back to the Castle. And Ziroonderel regretted

too late that she had idly said his mother was gone to the woods, for

those words of hers had called up too soon that spirit of roving which

was bound to come to him, and she saw that her spells could bring

content no more. So in the end she let him go to the woods. But not

until by lifting of wand and saying of incantation she had called the

glamour of the woods down to the nursery hearth, and had made it haunt

the shadows that went from the fire and creep with them all about the

room, till the nursery was all as mysterious as the forest. When this

spell would not soothe him and keep his longing at home she let him go

to the woods.



He stole away once more to the house of Oth, over crisp grass one

morning; and the old witch knew he had gone but did not call him back,

for she had no spell to curb the love of roving in man, whether it came

early or late. And she would not hold back his limbs when his heart was

gone to the woods, for it is ever the way of witches with any two things

to care for the more mysterious of the two. So the boy came alone to the

house of Oth, through his garden where dead flowers hung on brown

stalks, and the petals turned to slime if he fingered them, for November

was come and the frosts were abroad all night. And this time Orion just

met with a mood in Oth, which in less than an hour would have gone, that

was favourable to the boy's longing. Oth was taking down his bow from

the wall as Orion went in, and Oth's heart was gone to the woods; and

when the boy came yearning to go to the woods too the hunter in that

mood could not refuse him.



So Oth took Orion on his shoulder and went up out of the valley. Folk

saw them go thus, Oth with his bow and his soft noiseless sandals, and

his brown garments of leather, Orion on his shoulder, wrapped in the

skin of a fawn which Oth had thrown round him. And as the village fell

behind them Orion rejoiced to see the houses further and further away,

for he had never been so far from them before. And when the uplands

opened their distances to his eyes he felt that he was now upon no mere

walk, but a journey. And then he saw the solemn gloom of the wintry

woods far off, and that filled him at once with a delighted awe. To

their darkness, their mystery and their shelter Oth brought him.



So softly Oth entered the wood that the blackbirds that guarded it,

sitting watchful on branches, did not flee at his coming, but only

uttered slowly their warning notes, and listened suspiciously till he

passed, and were never sure if a man had broken the charm of the wood.

Into that charm and the gloom and the deep silence Oth moved gravely;

and a solemness came on his face as he entered the wood; for to go on

quiet feet through the wood was the work of his life, and he came to it

as men come to their heart's desire. And soon he put the boy down on the

brown bracken and went on for a while alone. Orion watched him go with

his bow in his left hand, till he disappeared in the wood, like a shadow

going to a gathering of shadows and merging amongst its fellows. And

although Orion might not go with him now, he had great joy from this,

for he knew by the way Oth went and the air he had that this was serious

hunting and no mere amusement made to please a child; and it pleased him

more than all the toys he had had. And quiet and lonely the great wood

loomed round him while he waited for Oth to return.



And after a long while he heard a sound, all in the wonder of the wood,

that was less loud than the sound that a blackbird made scattering dead

leaves to find insects, and Oth had come back again.



He had not found a deer; and for a while he sat by Orion and shot arrows

into a tree; but soon he gathered his arrows and took the boy on his

shoulder again and turned homewards. And there were tears in Orion's

eyes when they left the great wood; for he loved the mystery of the huge

grey oaks, which we may pass by unnoticed or with but a momentary

feeling of something forgotten, some message not quite given; but to him

their spirits were playmates. So he came back to Erl as from new

companions with his mind full of hints that he had from the wise old

trunks, for to him each bole had a meaning. And Ziroonderel was waiting

at the gateway when Oth brought Orion back; and she asked little of his

time in the woods, and answered little when he told her of it, for she

was jealous of them whose spell had lured him from hers. And all that

night his dreams hunted deer in the deeps of the wood.



Next day he stole away again to the house of Oth. But Oth was away

hunting, for he was in need of meat. So he went to the house of Threl.

And there was Threl in his dark house amongst manifold skins. "Take me

to the woods," said Orion. And Threl sat down in a wide wooden chair by

his fire to think about it and to talk of the woods. He was not like

Oth, speaking of a few simple things which he knew, of the deer, of the

ways of the deer, and of the approach of the seasons; but he spoke of

the things that he guessed in the deep of the wood and in the dark of

time, the fables of men and of beasts; and especially he cared to tell

the fables of the foxes and badgers, which he had come by from watching

their ways at the falling of dusk. And as he sat there gazing into the

fire, telling reminiscently of the ancient ways of the dwellers in

bracken and bramble, Orion forgot his longing to go to the woods, and

sat there on a small chair warm with skins, content. And to Threl he

told what he had not said to Oth, how he thought that his mother might

come one day round the trunk of one of the oak-trees, for she had gone

for a while to the woods. And Threl thought that that might be; for

there was nothing wonderful told of the woods that Threl thought

unlikely.



And then Ziroonderel came for Orion and took him back to the Castle. And

the next day she let him go to Oth again; and this time Oth took him

once more to the wood. And a few days later he went again to Threl's

dark house, in whose cobwebs and corners seemed to lurk the mystery of

the forest, and heard Threl's curious tales.



And the branches of the forest grew black and still against the blaze of

fierce sunsets, and Winter began to lay its spell on the uplands, and

the wiser ones of the village prophesied snow. And one day Orion out in

the woods with Oth saw the hunter shoot a stag. He watched him prepare

it and skin it and cut it into two pieces and tie them up in the skin,

with the head and horns hanging down. Then Oth fastened up the horns to

the rest of the bundle and heaved it on to his shoulder, and with his

great strength carried it home. And the boy rejoiced more than the

hunter.



And that evening Orion went to tell the story to Threl, but Threl had

more wonderful stories.



And so the days went by, while Orion drew from the forest and from the

tales of Threl a love of all things that pertain to a hunter's calling,

and a spirit grew in him that was well-matched with the name he bore;

and nothing showed in him, yet, of the magical part of his lineage.









                              CHAPTER XII



                        _The Unenchanted Plain_





When Alveric understood that he had lost Elfland it was already evening

and he had been gone two days and a night from Erl. For the second time

he lay down for the night on that shingly plain whence Elfland had ebbed

away: and at sunset the eastern horizon showed clear against turquoise

sky, all black and jagged with rocks, without any sign of Elfland. And

the twilight glimmered, but it was Earth's twilight, and not that dense

barrier for which Alveric looked, which lies between Elfland and Earth.

And the stars came out and were the stars we know, and Alveric slept

below their familiar constellations.



He awoke in the birdless dawn very cold, hearing old voices crying

faintly far off, as they slowly drifted away, like dreams going back to

dreamland. He wondered if they would come to Elfland again, or if

Elfland had ebbed too far. He searched all the horizon eastwards, and

still saw nothing but the rocks of that desolate land. So he turned

again toward the fields we know.



He walked back through the cold with all his impatience gone; and

gradually some warmth came to him from walking, and later a little from

the autumnal sun. He walked all day, and the sun was growing huge and

red when he came again to the leather-worker's cottage. He asked for

food, and the old man made him welcome: his pot was already simmering

for his own evening meal: and it was not long before Alveric was sitting

at the old table before a dish full of squirrels' legs, hedge-hogs and

rabbit's meat. The old man would not eat till Alveric had eaten, but

waited on him with such solicitude that Alveric felt that the moment of

his opportunity was come, and turned to the old man as he offered him a

piece of the back of a rabbit, and approached the subject of Elfland.



"The twilight is further away," said Alveric.



"Yes, yes," said the old man without any meaning in his voice, whatever

he had in his mind.



"When did it go?" said Alveric.



"The twilight, master?" said his host.



"Yes," said Alveric.



"Ah, the twilight," the old man said.



"The barrier," said Alveric, and he lowered his voice, although he knew

not why, "between here and Elfland."



At the word Elfland all comprehension faded out of the old man's eyes.



"Ah," he said.



"Old man," said Alveric, "you know where Elfland has gone."



"Gone?" said the old man.



That innocent surprise, thought Alveric, must be real; but at least he

knew where it had been; it used to be only two fields away from his

door.



"Elfland was in the next field once," said Alveric.



And the old man's eyes roved back into the past, and he gazed as it

were on old days awhile, then he shook his head. And Alveric fixed him

with his eye.



"You knew Elfland," he exclaimed.



Still the old man did not answer.



"You knew where the border was," said Alveric.



"I am old," said the leather-worker, "and I have no one to ask."



When he said that, Alveric knew that he was thinking of his old wife,

and he knew too that had she been alive and standing there at that

moment yet he would have had no news of Elfland: there seemed little

more to say. But a certain petulance held him to the subject after he

knew it to be hopeless.



"Who lives to the East of here?" he said.



"To the East?" the old man replied. "Master, are there not North and

South and West that you needs must look to the East?"



There was a look of entreaty in his face but Alveric did not heed it.

"Who lives to the East?" he said.



"Master, no one lives to the East," he answered. And that indeed was

true.



"What used to be there?" said Alveric.



And the old man turned away to see to the stewing of his pot, and

muttered as he turned, so that one hardly heard him.



"The past," he said.



No more would the old man say, nor explain what he had said. So Alveric

asked him if he could have a bed for the night, and his host showed him

the old bed he remembered across that vague number of years. And Alveric

accepted the bed without more ado so as to let the old man go to his own

supper. And very soon Alveric was deep asleep, warm and resting at last,

while his host turned over slowly in his mind many things of which

Alveric had supposed he knew nothing.



When the birds of our fields woke Alveric, singing late in the last of

October, on a morning that reminded them of Spring, he rose and went out

of doors, and went to the highest part of the little field that lay on

the windowless side of the old man's house toward Elfland. There he

looked eastward and saw all the way to the curved line of the sky the

same barren, desolate, rocky plain that had been there yesterday and the

day before. Then the leather-worker gave him breakfast, and afterwards

he went out and looked again at the plain. And over his dinner, which

his host timidly shared, Alveric neared once more the subject of

Elfland. And something in the old man's sayings or silences made Alveric

hopeful that even yet he would have some news of the whereabouts of the

pale-blue Elfin Mountains. So he brought the old man out and turned to

the East, to which his companion looked with reluctant eyes; and

pointing to one particular rock, the most noticeable and near, said,

hoping for definite news of a definite thing, "How long has that rock

been there?"



And the answer came to his hopes like hail to apple-blossom: "It is

there and we must make the best of it."



The unexpectedness of the answer dazed Alveric; and when he saw that

reasonable questions about definite things brought him no logical answer

he despaired of getting practical information to guide his fantastic

journey. So he walked on the eastward side of the cottage all the

afternoon, watching the dreary plain, and it never changed or moved: no

pale-blue mountains appeared, no Elfland came flooding back: and evening

came and the rocks glowed dully with the low rays of the sun, and

darkened when it set, changing with all Earth's changes, but with no

enchantment of Elfland. Then Alveric decided on a great journey.



He returned to the cottage and told the leather-worker that he needed to

buy much provisions, as much as he could carry. And over supper they

planned what he should have. And the old man promised to go next day

amongst the neighbours; telling of all the things he would get from

each, and somewhat more if God should prosper his snaring. For Alveric

had determined to travel eastward till he found the lost land.



And Alveric slept early, and slept long, till the last of his fatigue

was gone which came from his pursuit of Elfland: the old man woke him as

he came back from his snaring. And the creatures that he had snared the

old man put in his pot and hung it over his fire, while Alveric ate his

breakfast. And all the morning the leather-worker went from house to

house amongst his neighbours, dwelling on little farms at the edge of

the fields we know; and he got salted meats from some, bread from one, a

cheese from another, and came back burdened to his house in time to

prepare dinner.



And all the provender that burdened the old man Alveric shouldered in a

sack, and some he put in his wallet; and he filled his water-bottle and

two more besides that his host had made from large skins, for he had

seen no streams at all in the desolate land; and thus equipped he walked

some way from the cottage, and looked again at the land from which

Elfland had ebbed. He came back satisfied that he could carry provisions

for a fortnight.



And in the evening while the old man prepared pieces of squirrels' meat

Alveric stood again on the windowless side of the cottage, gazing still

across the lonely land, hoping always to see emerge from the clouds

that were colouring at sunset, those serene pale-blue mountains; and

seeing never a peak. And the sun set, and that was the last of October.



Next morning Alveric made a good meal in the cottage; then took his

heavy burden of provisions, and paid his host and started. The door of

the cottage opened toward the West and the old man cordially saw him

away from his door with godspeed and farewells, but he would not move

round his house to watch him going eastward; nor would he speak of that

journey: it was as though to him there were only three points of the

compass.



The bright autumnal sun was not yet high when Alveric went from the

fields we know to the land that Elfland had left and that nothing else

went near, with his big sack over his shoulder and his sword at his

side. The may trees of memory that he had seen were all withered now,

and the old songs and voices that had haunted that land were all now

faint as sighs; and there seemed to be fewer of them, as though some had

already died or had struggled back to Elfland.



All that day Alveric travelled, with the vigour that waits at the

beginning of journeys, which helped him on though he was burdened with

so much provisions, and a big blanket that he wore like a heavy cloak

round his shoulders; and he carried besides a bundle of firewood, and a

stave in his right hand. He was an incongruous figure with his stave and

his sack and his sword; but he followed one idea, one inspiration, one

hope; and so shared something of the strangeness that all men have who

do this.



Halting at noon to eat and rest he went slowly on again and walked till

evening: even then he did not rest as he had intended, for when twilight

fell and lay heavy along the eastern sky he continually rose from his

resting and went a little further to see if it might not be that dense

deep twilight that made the frontier of the fields we know, shutting

them off from Elfland. But it was always earthly twilight, until the

stars came out, and they were all the familiar stars that look on Earth.

Then he lay down among those unrounded and mossless rocks, and ate bread

and cheese and drank water; and as the cold of night began to come over

the plain he lit a small fire with his scanty bundle of wood and lay

close to it with his cloak and his blanket round him; and before the

embers were black he was sound asleep.



Dawn came without sound of bird or whisper of leaves or grasses, dawn

came in dead silence and cold; and nothing on all that plain gave a

welcome back to the light.



If darkness had lain forever upon those angular rocks it were better,

Alveric thought, as he saw their shapeless companies sullenly glowing;

darkness were better now that Elfland was gone. And though the misery of

that disenchanted place entered his spirit with the chill of the dawn,

yet his fiery hope still shone, and gave him little time to eat by the

cold black circle of his lonely fire before it hurried him onward

easterly over the rocks. And all that morning he travelled on without

the comradeship of a blade of grass. The golden birds that he had seen

before had long since fled back to Elfland, and the birds of our fields

and all living things we know shunned all that empty waste. Alveric

travelled as much alone as a man who goes back in memory to revisit

remembered scenes, and instead of remembered scenes he was in a place

from which every glamour had gone. He travelled somewhat lighter than on

the day before, but he went more wearily, for he felt more heavily now

the fatigue of the previous day. He rested long at mid-day and then went

on. The myriad rocks stretched on and slightly jagged the horizon, and

all day there came no glimpse of the pale-blue mountains. That evening

from his dwindling provision of wood Alveric made another fire; its

little flame going up alone in that waste seemed somehow to reveal the

monstrous loneliness. He sat by his fire and thought of Lirazel and

would not give up hope, though a glance at those rocks might have warned

him not to hope, for something in their chaotic look partook of the

plain that bred them, and they hinted it to be infinite.









                             CHAPTER XIII



                 _The Reticence of the Leather-Worker_





It was many days before Alveric learned from the monotony of the rocks

that one day's journey was the same as another, and that by no number of

journeys would he bring any change to his rugged horizons, which were

all drearily like the ones they replaced and never brought a view of the

pale-blue mountains. He had gone, while his fortnight's provisions grew

lighter and lighter, for ten days over the rocks: it was now evening and

Alveric understood at last that if he travelled further and failed soon

to see the peaks of the Elfin Mountains he would starve. So he ate his

supper sparingly in the darkness, his bundle of firewood having long

since been used, and abandoned the hope that had led him. And as soon as

there was any light at all to show him where the East was he ate a

little of what he had saved from his supper, and started his long tramp

back to the fields of men, over rocks that seemed all the harsher

because his back was to Elfland. All that day he ate and drank little,

and by nightfall he still had left full provisions for four more days.



He had hoped to travel faster during these last days, if he should have

to turn back, because he would travel lighter: he had given no thought

to the power of those monotonous rocks to weary and to depress with

their desolation when the hope that had somewhat illumined their

grimness was gone: he had thought little of turning back at all, till

the tenth evening came and no pale-blue mountains, and he suddenly

looked at his provisions. And all the monotony of his homeward journey

was broken only by occasional fears that he might not be able to come to

the fields we know.



The myriad rocks lay larger and thicker than tombstones and not so

carefully shaped, yet the waste had the look of a graveyard stretching

over the world with unrecording stones above nameless heads. Chilled by

the bitter nights, guided by blazing sunsets, he went on through the

morning mists and the empty noons and weary birdless evenings. More than

a week went by since he had turned, and the last of his water was gone,

and still he saw no sign of the fields we know, or anything more

familiar than rocks that he seemed to remember and which would have

misled him northward, southward, or eastward, were it not for the red

November sun that he followed and sometimes some friendly star. And then

at last, just as the darkness fell blackening that rocky multitude,

there showed westward over the rocks, pale at first against remnants of

sunset, but growing more and more orange, a window under one of the

gables of man. Alveric rose and walked towards it till the rocks in the

darkness and weariness overcame him and he lay down and slept; and the

little yellow window shone into his dreams and made forms of hope as

fair as any that came from Elfland.



The house that he saw in the morning when he woke seemed impossible to

be the one whose tiny light had held out hope and help to him in the

loneliness; it seemed now too plain and common. He recognized it for a

house not far from the one of the leather-worker. Soon he came to a pool

and drank. He came to a garden in which a woman was working early, and

she asked him whence he had come. "From the East," he said, and pointed,

and she did not understand. And so he came again to the cottage from

which he had started, to ask once more for hospitality from the old man

who had housed him twice.



He was standing in his doorway as Alveric came, walking wearily, and

again he made him welcome. He gave him milk and then food. And Alveric

ate, and then rested all the day: it was not till evening he spoke. But

when he had eaten and rested and he was at the table again, and supper

was now before him and there was light and warmth, he felt all at once

the need of human speech. And then he poured out the story of that great

journey over the land where the things of man ceased, and where yet no

birds or little beasts had come, or even flowers, a chronicle of

desolation. And the old man listened to the vivid words and said

nothing, making some comments of his own only when Alveric spoke of the

fields we know. He heard with politeness but said never a word of the

land from which Elfland had ebbed. It was indeed as though all the land

to the East were delusion, and as though Alveric had been restored from

it or had awoken from dream, and were now among reasonably daily things,

and there was nothing to say of the things of dream. Certainly never a

word would the old man say in recognition of Elfland, or of anything

eighty yards East of his cottage door. Then Alveric went to his bed and

the old man sat alone till his fire was low, thinking of what he had

heard and shaking his head. And all the next day Alveric rested there

or walked in the old man's autumn-smitten garden, and sometimes he tried

again to speak with his host of his great journey in the desolate land,

but got from him no admission that such lands were, checked always by

his avoidance of the topic, as though to speak of these lands might

bring them nearer.



And Alveric pondered on many reasons for this. Had the old man been to

Elfland in his youth and seen something he greatly feared, perhaps

barely escaping from death or an age-long love? Was Elfland a mystery

too great to be troubled by human voices? Did these folk dwelling there

at the edge of our world know well the unearthly beauty of all the

glories of Elfland, and fear that even to speak of them might be a lure

to draw them whither their resolution, barely perhaps, held them back?

Or might a word said of the magical land bring it nearer, to make

fantastic and elvish the fields we know? To all these ponderings of

Alveric there was no answer.



And yet one more day Alveric rested, and after that he set out to return

to Erl. He set out in the morning, and his host came with him out of his

doorway, saying farewell and speaking of his journey home and of the

affairs of Erl, which were food for gossip over many farmlands. And

great was the contrast between the good man's approval that he showed

thus for the fields we know, over which Alveric journeyed now, and his

disapproval for those other lands whither Alveric's hopes still turned.

And they parted, and the old man's farewells dwindled, and then he

turned back into his house, rubbing his hands contentedly as he slowly

went, for he was glad to see one who had looked toward the fantastic

lands turn now to a journey across the fields we know.



In those fields the frost was master, and Alveric walked over the crisp

grey grass and breathed the clear fresh air thinking little of his home

or his son, but planning how even yet he might come to Elfland; for he

thought that further North there might be a way, coming round perhaps

behind the pale-blue mountains. That Elfland had ebbed too far for him

to overtake it there he felt despairingly sure, but scarcely believed it

had gone along the entire frontier of twilight, where Elfland touches

Earth as far as poet has sung. Further North he might find the frontier,

unmoved, lying sleepy with twilight, and come under the pale-blue

mountains and see his wife again: full of these thoughts he went over

the misty mellow fields.



And full of his dreams and plans about that phantasmal land he came in

the afternoon to the woods that brood above Erl. He entered the wood,

and deep though he was amongst thoughts that were far from there, he

soon saw the smoke of a fire a little way off, rising grey among the

dark oak-boles. He went towards it to see who was there, and there were

his son and Ziroonderel warming their hands at the fire.



"Where have you been?" called Orion as soon as he saw him.



"Upon a journey," said Alveric.



"Oth is hunting," Orion said, and he pointed in the direction whence the

wind was fanning the smoke. And Ziroonderel said nothing, for she saw

more in Alveric's eyes than any questions of hers would have drawn from

his tongue. Then Orion showed him a deer-skin on which he was sitting.

"Oth shot it," he said.



There seemed to be a magic all round that fire of big logs quietly

smouldering in the woods upon Autumn's discarded robe that lay brilliant

there; and it was not the magic of Elfland, nor had Ziroonderel called

it up with her wand: it was only a magic of the wood's very own.



And Alveric stood there for a while in silence, watching the boy and the

witch by their fire in the woods, and understanding that the time was

come when he must tell Orion things that were not clear to himself and

that were puzzling him even now. Yet he did not speak of them then, but

saying something of the affairs of Erl, turned and walked on toward his

castle, while Ziroonderel and the boy came back later with Oth.



And Alveric commanded supper when he came to his gateway, and ate it

alone in the great hall that there was in the Castle of Erl, and all the

while he was pondering words to say. And then he went in the evening up

to the nursery and told the boy how his mother was gone for a while to

Elfland, to her father's palace (which may only be told of in song).

And, unheeding any words of Orion then, he held on with the brief tale

that he had come to tell, and told how Elfland was gone.



"But that cannot be," said Orion, "for I hear the horns of Elfland every

day."



"You can hear them?" Alveric said.



And the boy replied, "I hear them blowing at evening."









                              CHAPTER XIV



                  _The Quest for the Elfin Mountains_





Winter descended on Erl and gripped the forest, holding the small twigs

stiff and still: in the valley it silenced the stream; and in the fields

of the oxen the grass was brittle as earthenware, and the breath of the

beasts went up like the smoke of encampments. And Orion still went to

the woods whenever Oth would take him, and sometimes he went with Threl.

When he went with Oth the wood was full of the glamour of the beasts

that Oth hunted, and the splendour of the great stags seemed to haunt

the gloom of far hollows; but when he went with Threl a mystery haunted

the wood, so that one could not say what creature might not appear, nor

what haunted and hid by every enormous bole. What beasts there were in

the wood even Threl did not know: many kinds fell to his subtlety, but

who knew if these were all?



And when the boy was late in the wood, on happy evenings, he would

always hear as the sun went blazing down, rank on rank of the elfin

horns blowing far away eastwards in the chill of the coming dusk, very

far and faint, like reveillé heard in dreams. From beyond the woods

they sounded, all those ringing horns, from beyond the downs, far over

the furthest curve of them; and he knew them for the silver horns of

Elfland. In all other ways he was human, and but for his power to hear

those horns of Elfland, whose music rings but a yard beyond human

hearing, and his knowledge of what they were; but for these two things

he was as yet not more than a human child.



And how the horns of Elfland blew over the barrier of twilight, to be

heard by any ear in the fields we know, I cannot understand; yet

Tennyson speaks of them as heard "faintly blowing" even in these fields

of ours, and I believe that by accepting all that the poets say while

duly inspired our errors will be fewest. So, though Science may deny or

confirm it, Tennyson's line shall guide me here.



Alveric in those days went through the village of Erl, with his thoughts

far from there, moodily; and he stopped at many doors, and spoke and

planned, with his eyes always fixed as it seemed on things no one else

could see. He was brooding on far horizons, and the last, over which was

Elfland. And from house to house he gathered a little band of men.



It was Alveric's dream to find the frontier further North, to travel on

over the fields we know, always searching new horizons, till he came to

some place from which Elfland had not ebbed; to this he determined to

dedicate his days.



When Lirazel was with him amongst the fields we know, his thoughts had

ever been to make her more earthly; but now that she was gone the

thoughts of his own mind were becoming daily more elvish, and folk began

to look sideways at his fantastic mien. Dreaming always of Elfland and

of elvish things he gathered horses and provender and made for his

little band so huge a store of provisions that those who saw it

wondered. Many men he asked to be of that curious band, and few would go

with him to haunt horizons, when they heard whither he went. And the

first that he found to be of that band was a lad that was crossed in

love; and then a young shepherd, well used to lonely spaces; then one

that had heard a curious song that someone sang one evening: it had set

his thoughts roving away to impossible lands, and so he was well content

to follow his fancies. One huge full moon one summer had shone all a

warm night long on a lad as he lay in the hay, and after that he had

guessed or seen things that he said the moon showed him: whatever they

were none else saw any such things in Erl: he also joined Alveric's band

as soon as he asked him. It was many days before Alveric found these

four; and more he could not find but a lad that was quite witless, and

he took him to tend the horses, for he understood horses well, and they

understood him, though no human man or woman could make him out at all,

except his mother, who wept when Alveric had his promise to go; for she

said that he was the prop and support of her age, and knew what storms

would come and when the swallows would fly, and what colours the flowers

would come up from seeds she sowed in her garden, and where the spiders

would build their webs, and the ancient fables of flies: she wept and

said that there would be more things lost by his going than ever folk

guessed in Erl. But Alveric took him away: many go thus.



And one morning six horses heaped and hung with provisions all round

their saddles waited at Alveric's gateway, with the five men that were

to roam with him as far as the world's edge. He had taken long counsel

with Ziroonderel, but she said that no magic of hers had power to charm

Elfland or to cross the dread will of its King; he therefore commended

Orion to her care, knowing well that though hers was but simple or

earthly magic, yet no magic likely to cross the fields we know, nor

curse nor rune directed against his boy, would be able to thwart her

spell; and for himself he trusted to the fortune that waits at the end

of long weary journeys. To Orion he spoke long, not knowing how long

that journey might be before he again found Elfland, nor how easily he

might return across the frontier of twilight. He asked the boy what he

desired of life.



"To be a hunter," said he.



"What will you hunt while I am over the hills?" said his father.



"Stags, like Oth," said Orion.



Alveric commended that sport, for he himself loved it.



"And some day I will go a long way over the hills and hunt stranger

things," said the boy.



"What kind of things," asked Alveric. But the boy did not know.



His father suggested different kinds of beasts.



"No, stranger than them," said Orion. "Stranger even than bears."



"But what will they be?" asked his father.



"Magic things," said the boy.



But the horses moved restlessly down below in the cold, so that there

was no time for more idle talk, and Alveric said farewell to the witch

and his son and strode away thinking little of the future, for all was

too vague for thought.



Alveric mounted his horse over the heaps of provisions, and all the

band of six men rode away. The villagers stood in the street to see them

go. All knew their curious quest; and when all had saluted Alveric and

all had called their farewells to the last of the riders, a hum of talk

arose. And in the talk was contempt of Alveric's quest, and pity, and

ridicule; and sometimes affection spoke and sometimes scorn; yet in the

hearts of all there was envy; for their reason mocked the lonely roving

of that outlandish adventure, but their hearts would have gone.



And away rode Alveric out of the village of Erl with his company of

adventurers behind him; a moonstruck man, a madman, a lovesick lad, a

shepherd boy and a poet. And Alveric made Vand, the young shepherd, the

master of his encampment, for he deemed him to be the sanest amongst his

following; but there were disputes at once as they rode, before they

came to make any encampment; and Alveric, hearing or feeling the

discontent of his men, learned that on such a quest as his it was not

the sanest but the maddest that should be given authority. So he named

Niv, the witless lad, the master of his encampment; and Niv served him

well till a day that was far thence, and the moonstruck man stood by

Niv, and all were content to do the bidding of Niv, and all honoured

Alveric's quest. And many men in numerous lands do saner things with

less harmony.



They came to the uplands and rode over the fields, and rode till they

came to the furthest hedges of men, and to the houses that they have

built at the verge, beyond which even their thoughts refuse to fare.

Through this line of houses at the edge of those fields, four or five in

every mile, Alveric went with his queer company. The leather-worker's

hut was far to the South. Now he turned northward to ride past the

backs of the houses, over fields through which once the barrier of

twilight had run, till he should find some place where Elfland might

seem not to have ebbed so far. He explained this to his men, and the

leading spirits, Niv, and Zend who was moonstruck, applauded at once;

and Thyl, the young dreamer of songs, said the scheme was a wise one

too; and Vand was carried away by the keen zeal of these three; and it

was all one to Rannok the lover. And they had not gone far along the

backs of the houses when the red sun touched the horizon, and they

hastened to make an encampment by what remained of the light of that

short winter's day. And Niv said they would build a palace like those of

kings, and the idea fired Zend to work like three men, and Thyl helped

eagerly; and they set up stakes and stretched blankets upon them and

made a wall of brushwood, for they were but just outside the hedgerows,

and Vand helped too with rough hurdles and Rannok toiled on wearily; and

when all was finished Niv said that it was a palace. And Alveric went in

and rested, while they lit a fire outside. And Vand cooked a meal for

them all, which he did every day for himself upon lonely downs; and none

could have cared for the horses better than Niv.



And as the gloaming faded away the cold of winter grew; and by the time

that the first star shone there seemed nothing in all the night but

bitter cold, yet Alveric's men lay down by their fire in their leathers

and furs and slept, all but Rannok the lover.



To Alveric lying on furs in his shelter, watching red embers glowing

beyond dark shapes of his men, the quest promised well: he would go far

North watching every horizon for any sign of Elfland: he would go by the

border of the fields we know, and always be near provisions: and if he

got no glimpse of the pale-blue mountains he would go on till he found

some field from which Elfland had not ebbed, and so come round behind

them. And Niv and Zend and Thyl had all sworn to him that evening that

before many days were gone they would surely all find Elfland. Upon this

thought he slept.









                              CHAPTER XV



                     _The Retreat of the Elf King_





When Lirazel blew away with the splendid leaves they dropped one by one

from their dance in the gleaming air, and ran on over fields for a

while, and then gathered by hedgerows and rested; but Earth that pulls

all things down had no hold on her, for the rune of the King of Elfland

had crossed its borders, calling her home. So she rode carelessly the

great north-west wind, looking down idly on the fields we know, as she

swept over them homewards. No grip had Earth on her any longer at all;

for with her weight (which is where Earth holds us) were gone all her

earthly cares. She saw without grief old fields wherein she and Alveric

walked once: they drifted by; she saw the houses of men: these also

passed; and deep and dense and heavy with colour, she saw the border of

Elfland.



A last cry Earth called to her with many voices, a child shouting, rooks

cawing, the dull lowing of cows, a slow cart heaving home; then she was

into the dense barrier of twilight, and all Earth's sounds dimmed

suddenly: she was through it and they ceased. Like a tired horse falling

dead our north-west wind dropped at the frontier; for no winds blow in

Elfland that roam over the fields we know. And Lirazel slanted slowly

onward and down, till her feet were back again on the magical soil of

her home. She saw full fair the peaks of the Elfin Mountains, and dark

underneath them the forest that guarded the Elf King's throne. Above

this forest were glimmering even now great spires in the elfin morning,

which glows with more sparkling splendour than do our most dewy dawns,

and never passes away.



Over the elfin land the elfin lady passed with her light feet, touching

the grasses as thistledown touches them when it comes down to them and

brushes their crests while a languid wind rolls it slowly over the

fields we know. And all the elvish and fantastic things, and the curious

aspect of the land, and the odd flowers and the haunted trees, and the

ominous boding of magic that hung in the air, were all so full of

memories of her home that she flung her arms about the first gnarled

gnome-like trunk and kissed its wrinkled bark.



And so she came to the enchanted wood; and the sinister pines that

guarded it, with the watchful ivy leaning over their branches, bowed to

Lirazel as she passed. Not a wonder in that wood, not a grim hint of

magic, but brought back the past to her as though it had scarcely gone.

It was, she felt, but yesterday morning that she had gone away; and it

was yesterday morning still. As she passed through the wood the gashes

of Alveric's sword were yet fresh and white on the trees.



And now a light began to glow through the wood, then flash upon flash of

colours, and she knew they shone from the glory and splendour of flowers

that girdled the lawns of her father. To these she came again; and her

faint footprints that she had made as she left her father's palace, and

wondered to see Alveric there, were not yet gone from the bended grass

and the spiders' webs and the dew. There the great flowers glowed in the

elfin light; while beyond them there twinkled and flashed, with the

portal through which she had left it still open wide to the lawns, the

palace that may not be told of but only in song. Thither Lirazel

returned. And the Elf King, who heard by magic the tread of her

soundless feet, was before his door to meet her.



His great beard almost hid her as they embraced: he had sorrowed for her

long through that elfin morning. He had wondered, despite his wisdom; he

had feared, for all his runes; he had yearned for her as human hearts

may yearn, for all that he was of magic stock dwelling beyond our

fields. And now she was home again and the elfin morning brightened over

leagues of Elfland with the old Elf King's joy, and even a glow was seen

upon slopes of the Elfin Mountains.



And through the flash and glimmer of the vast doorway they passed into

the palace once more; the knight of the Elf King's guard saluted with

his sword as they went, but dared not turn his head after Lirazel's

beauty; they came again to the hall of the Elf King's throne, which is

made of rainbows and ice; and the great King seated himself and took

Lirazel on his knee; and a calm came down upon Elfland.



And for long through the endless elfin morning nothing troubled that

calm; Lirazel rested after the cares of Earth, the Elf King sat there

keeping the deep content in his heart, the knight of the guard remained

at the salute, his sword's point downwards still, the palace glowed and

shone: it was like a scene in some deep pool beyond the sound of a city,

with green reeds and gleaming fishes and myriads of tiny shells all

shining in the twilight on deep water, which nothing has disturbed

through all the long summer's day. And thus they rested beyond the fret

of time, and the hours rested around them, as the little leaping waves

of a cataract rest when the ice calms the stream: the serene blue peaks

of the Elfin Mountains above them stood like unchanging dreams.



Then like the noise of some city heard amongst birds in woods, like a

sob heard amongst children that are all met to rejoice, like laughter

amongst a company that weep, like a shrill wind in orchards amongst the

early blossom, like a wolf coming over the downs where the sheep are

asleep, there came a feeling into the Elf King's mood that one was

coming towards them across the fields of Earth. It was Alveric with his

sword of thunderbolt-iron, which somehow the old King sensed by its

flavour of magic.



Then the Elf King rose, and put his left arm about his daughter, and

raised his right to make a mighty enchantment, standing up before his

shining throne which is the very centre of Elfland. And with clear

resonance deep down in his throat he chaunted a rhythmic spell, all made

of words that Lirazel never had heard before, some age-old incantation,

calling Elfland away, drawing it further from Earth. And the marvellous

flowers heard as their petals drank in the music, and the deep notes

flooded the lawns; and all the palace thrilled, and quivered with

brighter colours; and a charm went over the plain as far as the frontier

of twilight, and a trembling went through the enchanted wood. Still the

Elf King chaunted on. The ringing ominous notes came now to the Elfin

Mountains, and all their line of peaks quivered as hills in haze, when

the heat of summer beats up from the moors and visibly dances in air.

All Elfland heard, all Elfland obeyed that spell. And now the King and

his daughter drifted away, as the smoke of the nomads drifts over Sahara

away from their camel's-hair tents, as dreams drift away at dawn, as

clouds over the sunset; and like the wind with the smoke, night with the

dreams, warmth with the sunset, all Elfland drifted with them. All

Elfland drifted with them and left the desolate plain, the dreary

deserted region, the unenchanted land. So swiftly that spell was

uttered, so suddenly Elfland obeyed, that many a little song, old

memory, garden or may tree of remembered years, was swept but a little

way by the drift and heave of Elfland, swaying too slowly eastwards till

the elfin lawns were gone, and the barrier of twilight heaved over them

and left them among the rocks.



And whither Elfland went I cannot say, nor even whether it followed the

curve of the Earth or drifted beyond our rocks out into twilight: there

had been an enchantment near to our fields and now there was none:

wherever it went it was far.



Then the Elf King ceased to chaunt and all was accomplished. As silently

as, in a moment that none can determine, the long layers over the sunset

turn from gold to pink, or from a glowing pink to a listless unlit

colour, all Elfland left the edges of those fields by which its wonder

had lurked for long ages of men, and was away now whither I know not.

And the Elf King seated himself again on his throne of mist and ice, in

which charmed rainbows were, and took Lirazel his daughter again on his

knee, and the calm that his chaunting had broken came back heavy and

deep over Elfland. Heavy and deep it fell on the lawns, heavy and deep

on the flowers; each dazzling blade of grass was still in its little

curve as though Nature in a moment of mourning said "Hush" at the

sudden end of the world; and the flowers dreamed on in their beauty,

immune from Autumn or wind. Far over the moors of the trolls slept the

calm of the King of Elfland, where the smoke from their queer

habitations hung stilled in the air; and in a forest wherein it quieted

the trembling of myriads of petals on roses, it stilled the pools where

the great lilies towered, till they and their reflections slept on in

one gorgeous dream. And there below motionless fronds of dream-gripped

trees, on the still water dreaming of the still air, where the huge

lily-leaves floated green in the calm, was the troll Lurulu, sitting

upon a leaf. For thus they named in Elfland the troll that had gone to

Erl. He sat there gazing into the water at a certain impudent look that

he had on. He gazed and gazed and gazed.



Nothing stirred, nothing changed. All things were still, reposing in the

deep content of the King. The Knight of the Guard brought his sword back

to the carry, and afterwards stood as still at his perpetual post as

some suit of armour whose owner is centuries dead. And still the King

sat silent with his daughter upon his knee, his blue eyes unmoving as

the pale-blue peaks, which through wide windows shone from the Elfin

Mountains.



And the Elf King stirred not, nor changed; but held to that moment in

which he had found content; and laid its influence over all his

dominions, for the good and welfare of Elfland; for he had what all our

troubled world with all its changes seeks, and finds so rarely and must

at once cast it away. He had found content and held it.



And in that calm that settled down upon Elfland there passed ten years

over the fields we know.









                              CHAPTER XVI



                        _Orion Hunts the Stag_





There passed ten years over the fields we know; and Orion grew and

learned the art of Oth, and had the cunning of Threl, and knew the woods

and the slopes and vales of the downs, as many another boy knows how to

multiply figures by other figures or to draw the thoughts from a

language not his own and to set them down again in words of his own

tongue. And little he knew of the things that ink may do, how it can

mark a dead man's thought for the wonder of later years, and tell of

happenings that are gone clean away, and be a voice for us out of the

dark of time, and save many a fragile thing from the pounding of heavy

ages; or carry to us, over the rolling centuries, even a song from lips

long dead on forgotten hills. Little knew he of ink; but the touch of a

roe deer's feet on dry ground, gone three hours, was a clear path to

him, and nothing went through the woods but Orion read its story. And

all the sounds of the wood were as full of clear meaning to him as are

to the mathematician the signs and figures he makes when he divides his

millions by tens and elevens and twelves. He knew by sun and moon and

wind what birds would enter the wood, he knew of the coming seasons

whether they would be mild or severe, only a little later than the

beasts of the wood themselves, which have not human reason or soul and

that know so much more than we.



And so he grew to know the very mood of the woods, and could enter their

shadowy shelter like one of the woodland beasts. And this he could do

when he was barely fourteen years; and many a man lives all his years

and can never enter a wood without changing the whole mood of its

shadowy ways. For men enter a wood perhaps with the wind behind them,

they brush against branches, step on twigs; speak, smoke, or tread

heavily; and jays cry out against them, pigeons leave the trees, rabbits

pad off to safety, and far more beasts than they know slip on soft feet

away from their coming. But Orion moved like Threl, in shoes of

deer-skin with the tread of a hunter. And none of the beasts of the wood

knew when he was come.



And he came to have a pile of skins like Oth, that he won with his bow

in the wood; and he hung great horns of stags in the hall of the castle,

high up among old horns where the spider had lived for ages. And this

was one of the signs whereby the people of Erl came to know him now for

their lord, for no news came of Alveric, and all the old lords of Erl

had been hunters of deer. And another sign was the departing of the

witch Ziroonderel when she went back to her hill; and Orion lived in the

castle now by himself, and she dwelt in her cottage again where her

cabbages grew on the high land near to the thunder.



And all that Winter Orion hunted the stags in the wood, but when Spring

came he put his bow away. Yet all through the season of song and flowers

his thoughts were still with the chase; and he went from house to house

wherever a man had one of the long thin dogs that hunt. And sometimes he

bought the dog, and sometimes the man would promise to lend it on days

of hunting. Thus Orion formed a pack of brown long-haired hounds and

yearned for the Spring and Summer to go by. And one Spring evening when

Orion was tending his hounds, when villagers were mostly at their doors

to notice the length of the evening, there came a man up the street whom

nobody knew. He came from the uplands, wrapped in the most aged of

clothes, which clung to him as though they had clung forever, and were

somehow a part of him and yet part of the Earth, for they were mellowed

by the clay of the high fields to its own deep brown. And folk noticed

the easy stride of a mighty walker, and a weariness in his eyes: and

none knew who he was.



And then a woman said "It is Vand that was only a lad." And they all

crowded about him then, for it was indeed Vand who had left the sheep

more than ten years ago to ride with Alveric no one in Erl knew whither.

"How fares our master?" they said. And a look of weariness came in the

eyes of Vand.



"He follows the quest," he said.



"Whither?" they asked.



"To the North," he said. "He seeks for Elfland still."



"Why have you left him?" they asked.



"I lost the hope," he said.



They questioned him no more then, for all men knew that to seek for

Elfland one needed a strong hope, and without it one saw no gleam of the

Elfin Mountains, serene with unchanging blue. And then the mother of Niv

came running up. "Is it indeed Vand?" she said. And they all said "Yes,

it is Vand."



And while they murmured together about Vand, and of how years and

wandering had changed him, she said to him, "Tell me of my son." And

Vand replied "He leads the quest. There is none whom my master trusts

more." And they all wondered, and yet they had no cause for wonder, for

it was a mad quest.



But Niv's mother alone did not wonder. "I knew he would," she said. "I

knew he would." And she was filled with a great content.



There are events and seasons to suit the mood of every man, though few

indeed could have suited the crazed mood of Niv, yet there came

Alveric's quest of Elfland, and so Niv found his work.



And talking in the late evening with Vand the folk of Erl heard tales of

many camps, many marches, a tale of profitless wandering where Alveric

haunted horizons year after year like a ghost. And sometimes out of

Vand's sadness that had come from those profitless years a smile would

shine as he told of some foolish happening that had taken place in the

camp. But all was told by one that had lost hope in the quest. This was

not the way to tell of it, not with doubts, not with smiles. For such a

quest may only be told of by those who are fired by its glory: from the

mad brain of Niv or the moonstruck wits of Zend we might have news of

that quest which could light our minds with some gleam of its meaning;

but never from the story, be it made out of facts or scoffs, told by one

whom the quest itself was able to lure no longer. The stars stole out

and still Vand was telling his stories, and one by one the people went

back to their houses, caring to hear no more of the hopeless quest. Had

the tale been told by one who clung yet to the faith that still was

leading Alveric's wanderers on, the stars would have weakened before

those folk left the teller, the sky would have brightened so widely

before they left him that one would have said at last "Why! It is

morning." Not till then would they have gone.



And the next day Vand went back to the downs and the sheep and troubled

himself with romantic quests no more.



And during that Spring men spoke of Alveric again, wondering awhile at

his quest, speaking awhile of Lirazel, and guessing where she had gone,

and guessing why; and where they could not guess telling some tale to

explain all, which went from mouth to mouth till they came to believe

it. And Spring went by and they forgot Alveric and obeyed the will of

Orion.



And then one day as Orion was waiting for the Summer to go by, with his

heart on frosty days and his dreams with his hounds on the uplands,

Rannok the lover came over the downs by the path by which Vand had come,

and walked down into Erl. Rannok with his heart free at last, with all

his melancholy gone, Rannok without woe, careless, care-free, content,

looking only for rest after his long wandering, sighing no more. And

nothing but this would have made Vyria care to have him, the girl he had

sought once. So the end of this was that she married him, and he too

went roaming no more on fantastic quests.



And though some looked to the uplands through many an evening, till the

long days wore away and a strange wind touched the leaves, and some

peered over the further curves of the downs, yet they saw none more of

the followers of Alveric's quest coming back by the path that Vand and

Rannok had trod. And by the time that the leaves were a wonder of

scarlet and gold men spoke no more of Alveric but obeyed Orion his son.



And in this season Orion arose one day before dawn and took his horn and

his bow and went to his hounds, who wondered to hear his step before

light was come: they heard it all in their sleep and awoke and clamoured

to him. And he loosed them and calmed them and led them away to the

downs. And to the lonely magnificence of the downs they came when the

stags are feeding on dewy grasses, before men are awake. All in the wild

wet morning they ran over the gleaming slopes, Orion and his hounds, all

rejoicing together. And the scent of the thyme came heavy with the air

that Orion breathed, as he trod its wide patches blooming late in the

year. To the hounds there came all the wandering scents of the morning.

And what wild creatures had met on the hill in the dark and what had

crossed it going upon their journeys, and whither all had gone when the

day grew bright, bringing the threat of man, Orion guessed and wondered;

but to the hounds all was clear. And some of the scents they noted with

careful noses, and some they scorned, and for one they sought in vain,

for the great red deer were not on the downs that morning.



And Orion led them far from the Vale of Erl but saw no stag that day,

and never a wind brought the scent that the anxious hounds were seeking,

nor could they find it hidden in any grass or leaves. And evening came

on him bringing his hounds home, calling on stragglers with his horn,

while the sun turned huge and scarlet; and fainter than echoes of his

horn, and far beyond downs and mist, but clear each silver note, he

heard the elfin horns that called to him always at evening.



With the great comradeship of a common weariness he and his hounds came

home dark in the starlight. The windows of Erl at last flashed to them

the glow of their welcome. Hounds came to their kennels and ate, and

lay down to contented sleep: Orion went to his castle. He too ate, and

afterwards sat thinking of the downs and his hounds and the day, his

mind lulled by fatigue to that point at which it rests beyond care.



And many a day passed thus. And then one dewy morning, coming over a

ridge of the downs, they saw a stag below them feeding late when all the

rest were gone. The hounds all broke into one joyous cry, the heavy stag

moved nimbly over the grass, Orion shot an arrow and missed; all these

things happened in a moment. And then the hounds streamed away, and the

wind went over the backs of them with a ripple, and the stag went away

as though every one of his feet were on little dancing springs. And at

first the hounds were swifter than Orion, but he was as tireless as

they, and by taking sometimes shorter ways than theirs he stayed near

them till they came to a stream and faltered and began to need the help

of human reason. And such help as human reason can give in such a matter

Orion gave them, and soon they were on again. And the morning passed as

they went from hill to hill, and they had not seen the stag a second

time; and the afternoon wore away, and still the hounds followed every

step of the stag with a skill as strange as magic. And towards evening

Orion saw him, going slowly, along the slope of a hill, over coarse

grass that was shining in the rays of the low sun. He cheered on his

hounds and they ran him over three more small valleys, but down at the

bottom of the third he turned round amongst the pebbles of a stream and

waited there for the hounds. And they came baying round him, watching

his brow antlers. And there they tore him down and killed him at sunset.

And Orion wound his horn with a great joy in his heart: he wanted no

more than this. And with a note like that of joy, as though they also

rejoiced, or mocked his rejoicing, over hills that he knew not, perhaps

from the far side of the sunset, the horns of Elfland answered.









                             CHAPTER XVII



                 _The Unicorn Comes in the Starlight_





And winter came, and whitened the roofs of Erl, and all the forest and

uplands. And when Orion took his hounds afield in the morning the world

lay like a book that was newly written by Life; for all the story of the

night before lay in long lines in the snow. Here the fox had gone and

there the badger, and here the red deer had gone out of the wood; the

tracks led over the downs and disappeared from sight, as the deeds of

statesmen, soldiers, courtiers and politicians appear and disappear on

the pages of history. Even the birds had their record on those white

downs, where the eye could follow each step of their treble claws, till

suddenly on each side of the track would appear three little scars where

the tips of their longest feathers had flicked the snow, and there the

track faded utterly. They were like some popular cry, some vehement

fancy, that comes down on a page of history for a day, and passes,

leaving no other record at all except those lines on one page.



And amongst all these records left of the story of night Orion would

choose the track of some great stag not too long gone, and would follow

it with his hounds away over the downs until even the sound of his horn

could be heard no longer in Erl. And over a ridge with his hounds, he

and they all black against red remnants of sunset, the folk of Erl would

see him coming home; and often it was not until all the stars were

glowing through the frost. Often the skin of a red deer hung over his

shoulders and the huge horns bobbed and nodded above his head.



And at this time there met one day in the forge of Narl, all unknown to

Orion, the men of the parliament of Erl. They met after sunset when all

were home from their work. And gravely Narl handed to each the mead that

was brewed from the clover honey; and when all were come they sat

silent. And then Narl broke the silence, saying that Alveric ruled over

Erl no more and his son was Lord of Erl, and telling again how once they

had hoped for a magic lord to rule over the valley and to make it

famous, and saying that this should be he. "And where now," he said, "is

the magic for which we hoped? For he hunts the deer as all his

forefathers hunted, and nothing of magic has touched him from over

there; and there is no new thing."



And Oth stood up to defend him. "He is as fleet as his hounds," he said,

"and hunts from dawn to sunset, and crosses the furthest downs and comes

home untired."



"It is but youth," said Guhic. And so said all but Threl.



And Threl stood up and said: "He has a knowledge of the ways of the

woods, and the lore of the beasts, beyond the learning of man."



"You taught him," said Guhic. "There is no magic here."



"Nothing of this," said Narl, "is from over there."



Thus they argued awhile lamenting the loss of the magic for which they

had hoped: for never a valley but history touches it once, never a

village but once its name is awhile on the lips of men; only the village

of Erl was utterly unrecorded; never a century knew it beyond the round

of its downs. And now all their plans seemed lost which they made so

long ago, and they saw no hope except in the mead that was brewed from

the clover honey. To this they turned in silence. Now it was a goodly

brew.



And in a while new plans flashed clear in their minds, new schemes, new

devices; and debates in the parliament of Erl flowed proudly on. And

they would have made a plan and a policy; but Oth arose from his seat.

There was in a flint-built house in the village of Erl an ancient

Chronicle, a volume bound in leather, and in it at certain seasons folk

wrote all manner of things, the wisdom of farmers concerning the time to

sow, the wisdom of hunters concerning the tracking of stags, and the

wisdom of prophets that told of the way of Earth. From this Oth quoted

now, two lines that he remembered on one of the aged pages; and all the

rest of that page told of hoeing; these lines he said to the parliament

of Erl as they sat with the mead before them at their table:



    "Hooded, and veiled with their night-like tresses,

    The Fates shall bring what no prophet guesses."



And then they planned no more, for either their minds were calmed by a

certain awe that they seemed to find in the lines, or it may be the mead

was stronger than anything written in books. However it be they sat

silent over their mead. And in early starlight while the West still

glowed they passed away from Narl's house back to their own homes

grumbling as they went that they had no magic lord to rule over Erl, and

yearning for magic, to save from oblivion the village and valley they

loved. They parted one by one as they came to their houses. And three or

four that dwelt near the end of the village on the side that was under

the downs were not yet come to their doors, when, white and clear in the

starlight and what remained of the gloaming, they saw hard-pressed and

wearied a hunted unicorn coming across the downs. They stopped and gazed

and shaded their eyes and stroked their beards and wondered. And still

it was a white unicorn galloping wearily. And then they heard drawing

nearer the cry of Orion's hounds.









                             CHAPTER XVIII



                    _The Grey Tent in the Evening_





On the day that the hunted unicorn crossed the valley of Erl Alveric had

wandered for over eleven years. For more than ten years, a company of

six, they went by the backs of the houses by the edge of the fields we

know, and camped at evenings with their queer material hung greyly on

poles. And whether or not the strange romance of their quest mirrored

itself in all the things about them, those camps of theirs seemed always

the strangest thing in the landscape; and as evening grew greyer around

them their romance and mystery grew.



And for all the vehemence of Alveric's ambition they travelled leisurely

and lazily: sometimes in a pleasant camp they stayed for three days;

then they went strolling on. Nine or ten miles they would march and then

they would camp again. Someday, Alveric felt sure in his heart, they

would see that border of twilight, someday they would enter Elfland. And

in Elfland he knew that time was not as here: he would meet Lirazel

unaged in Elfland, with never one smile lost to the raging years, never

a furrow worn by the ruin of time. This was his hope; and it led his

queer company on from camp to camp, and cheered them round the fire in

the lonely evenings, and brought them far to the North, travelling all

along the edge of the fields we know, where all men's faces turned the

other way, and the six wanderers went unseen and unheeded. Only the mind

of Vand hung back from their hope, and more and more every year his

reason denied the lure that was leading the rest. And then one day he

lost his faith in Elfland. After that he only followed until a day when

the wind was full of rain, and all were cold and wet and the horses

weary; he left them then.



And Rannok followed because he had no hope in his heart and wished to

wander from sorrow; until one day when all the blackbirds were singing

in trees of the fields we know, and his hopelessness left him in the

glittering sunshine, and he thought of the cosy homes and the haunts of

men. And soon he too passed out of the camp one evening and set off for

the pleasant lands.



And now the four that were left were all of one mind, and under the wet

coarse cloth that they hung on poles there was deep content in the

evenings. For Alveric clung to his hope with all the strength of his

race, that had once won Erl in old battles and held it for centuries

long, and in the vacant minds of Niv and Zend this idea grew strong and

big, like some rare flower that a gardener may plant by chance in a wild

untended place. And Thyl sung of the hope; and all his wild fancies that

roamed after song decked Alveric's quest with more and more of glamour.

So all were of one mind. And greater quests whether mad or sane have

prospered when this was so, and greater quests have failed when it was

otherwise.



They had gone northwards for years along the backs of those houses; and

then one day they would turn eastwards, wherever a certain look in the

sky or a touch of weirdness at evening, or a mere prophecy of Niv's,

seemed to suggest a proximity of Elfland. Upon such occasions they would

travel over the rocks, that for all those years lay bordering the fields

we know, until Alveric saw that provisions for men and horses would

barely bring them back to the houses of men. Then he would turn again,

but Niv would have led them still onward over the rocks, for his

enthusiasm grew as they went; and Thyl sang to them prophesying success;

and Zend would say that he saw the peaks and the spires of Elfland; only

Alveric was wise. And so they would come to the houses of men again, and

buy more provisions. And Niv and Zend and Thyl would babble of the

quest, pouring out the enthusiasm that burned in their hearts; but

Alveric did not speak of it, for he had learned that men in those fields

neither speak of nor look towards Elfland, although he had not learned

why.



Soon they were on again, and the folk that had sold them the produce of

fields we know gazed curiously after them as they went, as though they

thought that from madness alone or from dreams inspired by the moon came

all the talk they had heard from Niv and Zend and Thyl.



Thus they always travelled on, always seeking new points from which to

discover Elfland; and on the left of them blew scents from the fields we

know, the scent of lilac from cottage gardens in May, and then the scent

of the white-thorn and then of roses, till all the air was heavy with

new-mown hay. They heard the low of cattle away on their left, heard

human voices, heard partridges calling; heard all the sounds that go up

from happy farms; and on their right was always the desolate land,

always the rocks and never grass nor a flower. They had the

companionship of men no more, and yet they could not find Elfland. In

such a case they needed the songs of Thyl and the sure hope of Niv.



And the talk of Alveric's quest spread through the land and overtook his

wanderings, till all men that he passed by knew his story; and from some

he had the contempt that some men give to those who dedicate all their

days to a quest, and from others he had honour; but all he asked for was

provender, and this he bought when they brought it. So they went on.

Like legendary things they passed along the backs of the houses, putting

up their grey shapeless tent in the grey evenings. They came as quietly

as rain, and went away like mists drifting. There were jests about them

and songs. And the songs outlasted the jests. At last they became a

legend, which haunted those farms for ever: they were spoken of when men

told of hopeless quests, and held up to laughter or glory, whichever men

had to give.



And all the while the King of Elfland watched; for he knew by magic when

Alveric's sword drew near: it had troubled his kingdom once, and the

King of Elfland knew well the flavour of thunderbolt iron when he felt

it loom on the air. From this he had withdrawn his frontiers far,

leaving all that ragged land deserted of Elfland; and though he knew not

the length of human journeys, he had left a space that to cross would

weary the comet, and rightly deemed himself safe.



But when Alveric with his sword was far to the North the Elf King

loosened the grip with which he had withdrawn Elfland, as the Moon that

withdraws the tide lets it flow back again, and Elfland came racing back

as the tide over flat sands. With a long ribbon of twilight at its edge

it floated back over the waste of rocks; with old songs it came, with

old dreams, and with old voices. And in a while the frontier of

twilight lay flashing and glimmering near the fields we know, like an

endless Summer evening that lingered on out of the golden age. But bleak

and far to the North where Alveric wandered the limitless rocks still

heaped the desolate land; only to fields from which he and his sword and

his adventurous band were remotely gone that mighty inlet of Elfland

came lapping back. So that close again to the leather-worker's cottage

and to the farms of his neighbours, a bare three fields away, lay the

land that was heaped and piled with all the wonder for which poets seek

so hard, the very treasury of all romantic things; and the Elfin

Mountains gazed over the border serenely, as though their pale-blue

peaks had never moved. And here the unicorns fed along the border as it

was their custom to do, feeding sometimes in Elfland, which is the home

of all fabulous things, cropping lilies below the slopes of the Elfin

Mountains, and sometimes slipping through the border of twilight at

evening when all our fields are still, to feed upon earthly grass. It is

because of this craving for earthly grass that comes on them now and

then, as the red deer in Highland mountains crave once a year for the

sea, that, fabulous though they are on account of their birth in

Elfland, their existence is nevertheless known among men. The fox, which

is born in our fields, also crosses the frontier, going into the border

of twilight at certain seasons; it is thence that he gets the romance

with which he comes back to our fields. He also is fabulous, but only in

Elfland, as the unicorns are fabulous here.



And seldom the folk on those farms saw the unicorns, even dim in the

gloaming, for their faces were turned forever away from Elfland. The

wonder, the beauty, the glamour, the story of Elfland were for minds

that had leisure to care for such things as these; but the crops needed

these men, and the beasts that were not fabulous, and the thatch, and

the hedges and a thousand things: barely at the end of each year they

won their fight against Winter: they knew well that if they let a

thought of theirs turn but for a moment towards Elfland, its glory would

grip them soon and take all their leisure away, and there would be no

time left to mend thatch or hedge or to plough the fields we know. But

Orion lured by the sound of the horns that blew from Elfland at evening,

and that some elvish attuning of his ears to magical things caused him

alone in all those fields to hear, came with his hounds to a field

across which ran the frontier of twilight, and found the unicorns there

late on an evening. And, slipping along a hedge of the little field with

his hounds padding behind him, he came between a unicorn and the

frontier and cut it off from Elfland. This was the unicorn that with

flashing neck, covered with flecks of foam that shone silvery in the

starlight, panting, harried and weary, came across the valley of Erl,

like an inspiration, like a new dynasty to a custom-weary land, like

news of a happier continent found far-off by suddenly returned

sea-faring men.









                              CHAPTER XIX



                    _Twelve Old Men Without Magic_





Now few things pass by a village and leave no talk behind them. Nor did

this unicorn. For the three that saw it going by in the starlight

immediately told their families, and many of these ran from their houses

to tell the good news to others, for all strange news was accounted good

in Erl, because of the talk that it made; and talk was held to be

needful when work was over to pass the evenings away. So they talked

long of the unicorn.



And, after a day or two, in the forge of Narl the parliament of Erl was

met again, seated by mugs of mead, discussing the unicorn. And some

rejoiced and said that Orion was magic, because unicorns were of magic

stock and came from beyond our fields.



"Therefore," said one, "he has been to lands of which it does not become

us to speak, and is magic, as all things are which dwell over there."



And some agreed and held that their plans had come to fruition.



But others said that the beast went by in the starlight, if beast it

were, and who could say it was a unicorn? And one said that in the

starlight it was hard to see it at all, and another said unicorns were

hard to recognize. And then they began to discuss the size and shape of

these beasts, and all the known legends that told of them, and came no

nearer to agreeing together whether or not their lord had hunted a

unicorn. Till at last Narl seeing that they would not thus come by the

truth, and deeming it necessary that the fact should be established one

way or the other forever, rose up and told them that the time had come

for the vote. So by a method they had of casting shells of various

colours into a horn that was passed from man to man, they voted about

the unicorn as Narl had commanded. And a hush fell, and Narl counted.

And it was seen to have been established by vote that there had been no

unicorn.



Sorrowfully then that parliament of Erl saw that their plans to have a

magic lord had failed; they were all old men, and the hope that they had

had for so long being gone they turned less easily to newer plans than

they had to the plan that they made so long ago. What should they do

now, they said? How come by magic? What could they do that the world

should remember Erl? Twelve old men without magic. They sat there over

their mead, and it could not lighten their sadness.



But Orion was away with his hounds near that great inlet of Elfland

where it lay as it were at high tide, touching the very grass of the

fields we know. He went there at evening when the horns blew clear to

guide him, and waited there all quiet at the edge of those fields for

the unicorns to steal across the border. For he hunted stags no more.



And as he went over those fields in the late afternoon folk working on

the farms would greet him cheerily; but when still he went eastwards

they spoke to him less and less, till at last when he neared the border

and still kept on they looked his way no more, but left him and his

hounds to their own devices.



And by the time the sun set he would be standing quiet by a hedge that

ran right down into the frontier of twilight, with his hounds all

gathered close in under the hedge, with his eye on them all lest one of

them dared to move. And the pigeons would come home to trees of the

fields we know, and twittering starlings; and the elfin horns would

blow, clear silver magical music thrilling the chilled air, and all the

colours of clouds would go suddenly changing; it was then in the failing

light, in the darkening of colours, that Orion would watch for a dim

white shape stepping out of the border of twilight. And this evening

just as he hushed a hound with his hand, just as all our fields went

dim, there slipped a great white unicorn out of the border, still

munching lilies such as never grew in any fields of ours. He came, a

whiteness on perfectly silent feet, four or five yards into the fields

we know, and stood there still as moonlight, and listened and listened

and listened. Orion never moved, and he kept his hounds silent by some

power he had or by some wisdom of theirs. And in five minutes the

unicorn made a step or two forward, and began to crop the long sweet

earthly grasses. And as soon as he moved there came others through the

deep blue border of twilight, and all at once there were five of them

feeding there. And still Orion stood with his hounds and waited.



Little by little the unicorns moved further away from the border, lured

further and further into the fields we know by the deep rich earthly

grasses, on which all five of them browsed in the silent evening. If a

dog barked, even if a late cock crew, up went all their ears at once

and they stood watchful, not trusting anything in the fields of men, or

venturing into them far.



But at last the one that had come first through the twilight got so far

from his magical home that Orion was able to run between him and the

frontier, and his hounds came behind him. And then had Orion been toying

with the chase, then had he hunted but for an idle whim, and not for

that deep love of the huntsman's craft that only huntsmen know, then had

he lost everything: for his hounds would have chased the nearest

unicorns, and they would have been in a moment across the frontier and

lost, and if the hounds had followed they would have been lost too, and

all that day's work would have gone for nothing. But Orion led his

hounds to chase the furthest, watching all the while to see if any hound

would try to pursue the others; and only one began to, but Orion's whip

was ready. And so he cut his quarry off from its home, and his hounds

for the second time were in full cry after a unicorn.



As soon as the unicorn heard the feet of the hounds, and saw with one

flash of his eye that he could not get to his enchanted home, he shot

forward with a sudden spring of his limbs and went like an arrow over

the fields we know. When he came to hedges he did not seem to gather his

limbs to leap but seemed to glide over them with motionless muscles,

galloping again when he touched the grass once more.



In that first rush the hounds drew far ahead of Orion, and this enabled

him to head the unicorn off whenever it tried to turn to the magical

land; and at such turnings he came near his hounds again. And the third

time that Orion turned the unicorn it galloped straight away, and so

continued over the fields of men. The cry of the hounds went through the

calm of the evening like a long ripple across a sleeping lake following

the unseen way of some strange diver. In that straight gallop the

unicorn gained so much on the hounds that soon Orion only saw him far

off, a white spot moving along a slope in the gloaming. Then it reached

the top of a valley and passed from view. But that strong queer scent

that led the hounds like a song remained clear on the grass, and they

never checked or faltered except for a moment at streams. Even there

their ranging noses picked up the magical scent before Orion came up to

give them his aid.



And as the hunt went on the daylight faded away, till the sky was all

prepared for the coming of stars. And one or two stars appeared, and a

mist came up from streams and spread all white over fields, till they

could not have seen the unicorn if he had been close before them. The

very trees seemed sleeping. They passed by little houses, lonely,

sheltered by elms; shut off by high hedges of yew from those that roamed

the fields; houses that Orion had never seen or known till the chance

course of this unicorn brought him suddenly past their doors. Dogs

barked as they passed, and continued barking long, for that magical

scent on the air and the rush and the voice of the pack told them

something strange was afoot; and at first they barked because they would

have shared in what was afoot, and afterwards to warn their masters

about the strangeness. They barked long through the evening.



And once, as they passed a little house in a cluster of old thorns, a

door suddenly opened, and a woman stood gazing to see them go by: she

could have seen no more than grey shapes, but Orion in the moment as he

passed saw all the glow of the house, and the yellow light streaming out

into the cold. The merry warmth cheered him, and he would have rested

awhile in that little oasis of man in the lonely fields, but the hounds

went on and he followed; and those in the houses heard their cry go past

like the sound of a trumpet whose echoes go fading away amongst the

furthest hills.



A fox heard them coming, and stood quite still and listened: at first he

was puzzled. Then he caught the scent of the unicorn, and all was clear

to him, for he knew by the magic flavour that it was something coming

from Elfland.



But when sheep caught the scent they were terrified, and ran all huddled

together until they could run no more.



Cattle leaped up from their sleep, gazed dreamily, and wondered; but the

unicorn went through them and away, as some rose-scented breeze that has

strayed from valley gardens into the streets of a city slips through the

noisy traffic and is gone.



Soon all the stars were looking on those quiet fields through which the

hunt went with its exultation, a line of vehement life cleaving through

sleep and silence. And now the unicorn, far out of sight though he was,

no longer gained a little at every hedge. For at first he lost no more

pace at any hedge than a bird loses passing clear of a cloud, while the

great hounds struggled through what gaps they could find, or lay on

their sides and wriggled between the stems of the bushes. But now he

gathered his strength with more effort at every hedge, and sometimes hit

the top of the hedge and stumbled. He was galloping slower too; for this

was a journey such as no unicorn made through the deep calm of Elfland.

And something told the tired hounds they were drawing nearer. And a new

joy entered their voices.



They crossed a few more black hedges, and then there loomed before them

the dark of a wood. When the unicorn entered the wood the voices of the

hounds were clear in his ears. A pair of foxes saw him going slowly, and

they ran along beside him to see what would befall the magic creature

coming weary to them from Elfland. One on each side they ran, keeping

his slow pace and watching him, and they had no fear of the hounds

though they heard their cry, for they knew that nothing that followed

that magical scent would turn aside after any earthly thing. So he went

labouring through the wood, and the foxes watched him curiously all the

way.



The hounds entered the wood and the great oaks rang with the sound of

them, and Orion followed with an enduring speed that he may have got

from our fields or that may have come to him over the border from

Elfland. The dark of the wood was intense but he followed his hounds'

cry, and they did not need to see with that wonderful scent to guide

them. They never wavered as they followed that scent, but went on

through gloaming and starlight. It was not like any hunt of fox or stag;

for another fox will cross the line of a fox, or a stag may pass through

a herd of stags and hinds; even a flock of sheep will bewilder hounds by

crossing the line they follow; but this unicorn was the only magical

thing in all our fields that night, and his scent lay unmistakable over

the earthly grass, a burning pungent flavour of enchantment among the

things of every day. They hunted him clear through the wood and down to

a valley, the two foxes keeping with him and watching still: he picked

his feet carefully as he went down the hill, as though his weight hurt

them while he descended the slope, yet his pace was as fast as that of

the hounds going down: then he went a little way along the trough of the

valley, turning to his left as soon as he came down the hill, but the

hounds gained on him then and he turned for the opposite slope. And then

his weariness could be concealed no longer, the thing that all wild

creatures conceal to the last; he toiled over every step as though his

legs dragged his body heavily. Orion saw him from the opposite slope.



And when the unicorn got to the top the hounds were close behind him, so

that he suddenly whipped round his great single horn and stood before

them threatening. Then the hounds bayed about him, but the horn waved

and bowed with such swift grace that no hound got a grip; they knew

death when they saw it, and eager though they were to fasten upon him

they leaped back from that flashing horn. Then Orion came up with his

bow, but he would not shoot, perhaps because it was hard to put an arrow

safely past his pack of hounds, perhaps because of a feeling such as we

have to-day, and which is no new thing among us, that it was unfair to

the unicorn. Instead he drew an old sword that he was wearing, and

advanced through his hounds and engaged that deadly horn. And the

unicorn arched his neck, and the horn flashed at Orion; and, weary

though the unicorn was, yet a mighty force remained in that muscular

neck to drive the blow that he aimed, and Orion barely parried. He

thrust at the unicorn's throat, but the great horn tossed the sword

aside from its aim and again lunged at Orion. Again he parried with the

whole weight of his arm, and had but an inch to spare. He thrust again

at the throat, and the unicorn parried the sword-thrust almost

contemptuously. Again and again the unicorn aimed fair at Orion's heart;

the huge white beast stepped forward pressing Orion back. That graceful

bowing neck, with its white arch of hard muscle driving the deadly horn,

was wearying Orion's arm. Once more he thrust and failed; he saw the

unicorn's eye flash wickedly in the starlight, he saw all white before

him the fearful arch of its neck, he knew he could turn aside its heavy

blows no more; and then a hound got a grip in front of the right

shoulder. No moments passed before many another hound leaped on to the

unicorn, each with a chosen grip, for all that they looked like a rabble

rolling and heaving by chance. Orion thrust no more, for many hounds all

at once were between him and his enemy's throat. Awful groans came from

the unicorn, such sounds as are not heard in the fields we know; and

then there was no sound but the deep growl of the hounds that roared

over the wonderful carcase as they wallowed in fabulous blood.









                              CHAPTER XX



                          _A Historical Fact_





Amongst the weary hounds refreshed with fury and triumph, Orion stepped

with his whip and drove them away from the monstrous dead body, and sent

the lash quivering round in a wide circle, while in his other hand he

took his sword and cut off the unicorn's head. He also took the skin of

the long white neck and brought it away dangling empty from the head.

All the while the hounds bayed and made eager rushes one by one at that

magical carcase whenever one saw a chance of eluding the whip; so that

it was long before Orion got his trophy, for he had to work as hard with

his whip as with his sword. But at last he had it slung by a leather

thong over his shoulders, the great horn pointing upwards past the right

side of his head, and the smeared skin hanging down along his back. And

while he arranged it thus he allowed his hounds to worry the body again

and taste that wonderful blood. Then he called to them and blew a note

on his horn and turned slowly home towards Erl, and they all followed

behind him. And the two foxes stole up to taste the curious blood, for

they had sat and waited for this.



While the unicorn was climbing his last hill Orion felt such fatigue

that he could have gone little further, but now that the heavy head hung

from his shoulders all his fatigue was gone and he trod with a lightness

such as he had in the mornings, for it was his first unicorn. And his

hounds seemed refreshed as though the blood they had lapped had some

strange power in it, and they came home riotously, gambolling and

rushing ahead as when newly loosed from their kennels.



Thus Orion came home over the downs in the night, till he saw the valley

before him full of the smoke of Erl, where one late light was burning in

a window of one of his towers. And, coming down the slopes by familiar

ways, he brought his hounds to their kennels; and just before dawn had

touched the heights of the downs he blew his horn before his postern

door. And the aged guardian of the door when he opened it to Orion saw

the great horn of the unicorn bobbing over his head.



This was the horn that was sent in later years as a gift from the Pope

to King Francis. Benvenuto Cellini tells of it in his memoirs. He tells

how Pope Clement sent for him and a certain Tobbia, and ordered them to

make designs for the setting of a unicorn's horn, the finest ever seen.

Judge then of Orion's delight when the horn of the first unicorn he ever

took was such as to be esteemed generations later the finest ever seen,

and in no less a city than Rome, with all her opportunities to acquire

and compare such things. For a number of these curious horns must have

been available for the Pope to have selected for the gift the finest

ever seen; but in the simpler days of my story the rarity of the horn

was so great that unicorns were still considered fabulous. The year of

the gift to King Francis would be about 1530, the horn being mounted in

gold; and the contract went to Tobbia and not to Benvenuto Cellini. I

mention the date because there are those who care little for a tale if

it be not here and there supported by history, and who even in history

care more for fact than philosophy. If any such reader have followed the

fortunes of Orion so far he will be hungry by now for a date or a

historical fact. As for the date, I give him 1530. While for the

historical fact I select that generous gift recorded by Benvenuto

Cellini, because it may well be that just where he came to unicorns such

a reader may have felt furthest away from history and have felt

loneliest just at this point for want of historical things. How the

unicorn's horn found its way from the Castle of Erl, and in what hands

it wandered, and how it came at last to the City of Rome, would of

course make another book.



But all that I need say now about that horn is that Orion took the whole

head to Threl, who took off the skin and washed it and boiled the skull

for hours, and replaced the skin and stuffed the neck with straw; and

Orion set it in the midmost place among all the heads that hung in the

high hall. And the rumour went all through Erl, as swift as unicorns

gallop, telling of this fine horn that Orion had won. So that the

parliament of Erl met again in the forge of Narl. They sat at the table

there debating the rumour; and others besides Threl had seen the head.

And at first, for the sake of old divisions, some held to their opinion

that there had been no unicorn. They drank Narl's goodly mead and argued

against the monster. But after a while, whether Threl's argument

convinced them, or whether as is more likely, they yielded from

generosity, which arose like a beautiful flower out of the mellow mead,

whatever it was the debate of those that opposed the unicorn

languished, and when the vote was put it was declared that Orion had

killed a unicorn, which he had hunted hither from beyond the fields we

know.



And at this they all rejoiced; for they saw at last the magic for which

they had longed, and for which they had planned so many years ago, when

all were younger and had had more hope in their plans. And as soon as

the vote was taken Narl brought out more mead, and they drank again to

mark the happy occasion: for magic at last, said they, had come on

Orion, and a glorious future surely awaited Erl. And the long room and

the candles and the friendly men and the deep comfort of mead made it

easy to look a little way forward into time and to see a year or so that

had not yet come, and to see coming glories glowing a little way off.

And they told again of the days, but nearer now, when the distant lands

should hear of the vale they loved: they told again of the fame of the

fields of Erl going from city to city. One praised its castle, another

its huge high downs, another the vale itself all hidden from every land,

another the dear quaint houses built by an olden folk, another the deep

of the woods that lay over the sky-line; and all spoke of the time when

the wide world should hear of it all, because of the magic that there

was in Orion; for they knew that the world has a quick ear for magic,

and always turns toward the wonderful even though it be nearly asleep.

Their voices were high, praising magic, telling again of the unicorn,

glorying in the future of Erl, when suddenly in the doorway stood the

Freer. He was there in his long white robe with its trimming of mauve,

in the door with the night behind him. As they looked, in the light of

their candles, they could see he was wearing an emblem, on a chain of

gold round his neck. Narl bade him welcome, some moved a chair to the

table; but he had heard them speak of the unicorn. He lifted his voice

from where he stood, and addressed them. "Cursed be unicorns," he said,

"and all their ways, and all things that be magic."



In the awe that suddenly changed the mellow room one cried: "Master!

Curse not us!"



"Good Freer," said Narl, "we hunted no unicorn."



But the Freer raised up his hand against unicorns and cursed them yet.

"Curst be their horn," he cried, "and the place where they dwell, and

the lilies whereon they feed, curst be all songs that tell of them.

Curst be they utterly with everything that dwelleth beyond salvation."



He paused to allow them to renounce the unicorns, standing still in the

doorway, looking sternly into the room.



And they thought of the sleekness of the unicorn's hide, his swiftness,

the grace of his neck, and his dim beauty cantering by when he came past

Erl in the evening. They thought of his stalwart and redoubtable horn;

they remembered old songs that told of him. They sat in uneasy silence

and would not renounce the unicorn.



And the Freer knew what they thought and he raised his hand again, clear

in the candle-light with the night behind him. "Curst be their speed,"

he said, "and their sleek white hide; curst be their beauty and all that

they have of magic, and everything that walks by enchanted streams."



And still he saw in their eyes a lingering love for those things that he

forbade, and therefore he ceased not yet. He lifted his voice yet louder

and continued, with his eye sternly upon those troubled faces: "And

curst be trolls, elves, goblins and fairies upon the Earth, and

hypogriffs and Pegasus in the air, and all the tribes of the mer-folk

under the sea. Our holy rites forbid them. And curst be all doubts, all

singular dreams, all fancies. And from magic may all true folk be turned

away. Amen."



He turned round suddenly and was into the night. A wind loitered about

the door, then flapped it to. And the large room in the forge of Narl

was as it had been but a few moments before, yet the mellow mood of it

seemed dulled and dim. And then Narl spoke, rising up at the table's end

and breaking the gloom of the silence. "Did we plan our plans," he said,

"so long ago, and put our faith in magic, that we should now renounce

magical things and curse our neighbours, the harmless folk beyond the

fields we know, and the beautiful things of the air, and dead mariners'

lovers dwelling beneath the sea?"



"No, no," said some. And they quaffed their mead again.



And then one rose with his horn of mead held high, then another and then

another, till all were standing upright all round the light of the

candles. "Magic!" one cried. And the rest with one accord took up his

cry till all were shouting "Magic."



The Freer on his homeward way heard that cry of Magic, he gathered his

sacred robe more closely around him and clutched his holy things, and

said a spell that kept him from sudden demons and the doubtful things of

the mist.









                              CHAPTER XXI



                        _On the Verge of Earth_





And on that day Orion rested his hounds. But the next day he rose early

and went to his kennels and loosened the joyous hounds in the shining

morning, and led them out of the valley and over the downs towards the

frontier of twilight again. And he took his bow with him no more, but

only his sword and his whip; for he had come to love the joy of his

fifteen hounds when they hunted the one-horned monster, and felt that he

shared the joy of every hound; while to shoot one with an arrow would be

but a single joy.



All day he went over the fields, greeting some farmer here and there, or

worker in the field, and gaining greetings in return, and good wishes

for sport. But when evening came and he was near the frontier, fewer and

fewer greeted him as he passed, for he was manifestly travelling where

none went, whence even their thoughts held back. So he went lonely, yet

cheered by his eager thoughts, and happy in the comradeship of his

hounds; and both his thoughts and his hounds were all for the chase.



And so he came to the barrier of twilight again, where the hedges ran

down to it from the fields of men and turned strange and dim in a glow

that is not of our Earth and disappeared in the twilight. He stood with

his hounds close in against one of these hedges just where it touched

the barrier. The light just there on the hedge, if like anything of our

Earth, was like the misty dimness that flashes upon a hedge, seen only

across one field, when touched by the rainbow: in the sky the rainbow is

clear, but close across one wide field the rainbow's end scarcely shows,

yet a heavenly strangeness has touched and altered the hedge. In some

such light as that glowed the last of the hawthorns that grew in the

fields of men. And just beyond it, like a liquid opal, all full of

wandering lights, lay the barrier through which no man can see, and no

sound come but the sound of the elfin horns, and only that to the ears

of very few. The horns were blowing now, piercing that barrier of dim

light and silence with the magical resonance of their silver note, that

seemed to beat past all things intervening to come to Orion's ear, as

the sunlight beats through ether to illumine the vales of the moon.



The horns died down, and nothing whispered from Elfland; and all the

sounds thenceforth were the sounds of an earthly evening. Even these

grew few, and still no unicorns came.



A dog barked far away: a cart, the sole sound on an empty road, went

homeward wearily: someone spoke in a lane, and then left the silence

unbroken, for words seemed to offend the hush that was over all our

fields. And in the hush Orion gazed at the frontier, watching for the

unicorns that never came, expecting each moment to see one step through

the twilight. But he had done unwisely in coming to the same spot at

which he had found the five unicorns only two days before. For of all

creatures the unicorns are the wariest, guarding their beauty from the

eye of man with never ceasing watchfulness; dwelling all day beyond the

fields we know, and only entering them rarely at evening, when all is

still, and with the utmost vigilance, and venturing even then scarcely

beyond the edges. To come on such animals twice at the same spot within

two days with hounds, after hunting and killing one of them, was more

unlikely than Orion thought. But his heart was full of the triumph of

his hunt, and the scene of it lured him back to it in the way that such

scenes have. And now he gazed at the frontier, waiting for one of these

great creatures to come proudly through, a great tangible shape out of

the dim opalescence. And no unicorn came.



And standing gazing there so long, that curious boundary began to lure

him till his thoughts went roaming with its wandering lights and he

desired the peaks of Elfland. And well they knew that lure who dwelt on

those farms lying all along the edge of the fields we know, and wisely

kept their eyes turned ever away from that wonder that lay with its

marvel of colours so near to the backs of their houses. For there was a

beauty in it such as is not in all our fields; and it is told those

farmers in youth how, if they gaze upon those wandering lights, there

will remain no joy for them in the goodly fields, the fine, brown

furrows or the waves of wheat, or in any things of ours; but their

hearts will be far from here with elfin things, yearning always for

unknown mountains and for folk not blessed by the Freer.



And standing now, while our earthly evening waned, upon the very edge of

that magical twilight, the things of Earth rushed swiftly from his

remembrance, and suddenly all his care was for elfin things. Of all the

folk that trod the paths of men he remembered only his mother, and

suddenly knew, as though the twilight had told him, that she was

enchanted and he of a magical line. And none had told him this, but he

knew it now.



For years he had wondered through many an evening and guessed where his

mother was gone: he had guessed in lonely silence; none knew what the

child was guessing: and now an answer seemed to hang in the air; it

seemed as though she were only a little way off across the enchanted

twilight that divided those farms from Elfland. He moved three steps and

came to the frontier itself; his foot was the furthest that stood in the

fields we know: against his face the frontier lay like a mist, in which

all the colours of pearls were dancing gravely. A hound stirred as he

moved, the pack turned their heads and eyed him; he stood, and they

rested again. He tried to see through the barrier, but saw nothing but

wandering lights that were made by the massing of twilights from the

ending of thousands of days, which had been preserved by magic to build

that barrier there. Then he called to his mother across that mighty gap,

those few paces of airy twilight lying over the fields, which had upon

one side Earth and the haunts of men, and the time that we measure by

minutes and hours and years, and upon the other Elfland and another way

of time. He called to her twice and listened, and called again; and

never a cry or a whisper came out of Elfland. He felt then the magnitude

of the gulf that divided him from her, and knew it to be vast and dark

and strong, like the gulfs that set apart our times from a bygone day,

or that stand between daily life and the things of dream, or between

folk tilling the Earth and the heroes of song, or between those living

yet and those they mourn. And the barrier twinkled and sparkled as

though so airy a thing never divided lost years from that fleeing hour

called Now.



He stood there with the cries of Earth faint in the late evening, behind

him, and the mellow glow of the soft earthly twilight; and before him,

close to his face, the utter silence of Elfland, and the barrier that

made that silence, gleaming with its strange beauty. And now he thought

no more of earthly things, but only gazed into that wall of twilight, as

prophets tampering with forbidden lore gaze into cloudy crystals. And to

all that was elvish in Orion's blood, to all that he had of magic from

his mother, the little lights of the twilight-builded boundary lured and

tempted and beckoned. He thought of his mother dwelling in lonely ease

beyond the rage of Time, he thought of the glories of Elfland, dimly

known by magical memories that he had had from his mother. The little

cries of the earthly evening behind him he heeded no more nor heard. And

with all these little cries were lost to him also the ways and the needs

of men, the things they plan, the things they toil for and hope for, and

all the little things their patience achieves. In the new knowledge that

had come to him beside this glittering boundary that he was of magical

blood he desired at once to cast off his allegiance to Time, and to

leave the lands that lay under Time's dominion and were ever scourged by

his tyranny, to leave them with no more than five short paces, and to

enter the ageless land where his mother sat with her father while he

reigned on his misty throne in that hall of bewildering beauty at which

only song has guessed. No more was Erl his home, no more were the ways

of man his ways: their fields to his feet no more! But the peaks of the

Elfin Mountains were to him now what welcoming eaves of straw are to

earthly labourers at evening; the fabulous, the unearthly, were to Orion

home. Thus had that barrier of twilight, too long seen, enchanted him;

so much more magical was it than any earthly evening.



And there are those that might have gazed long at it and even yet turned

away; but not easily Orion; for though magic has power to charm worldly

things they respond to enchantment heavily and slowly, while all that

was magic in Orion's blood flashed answer to the magic that shone in the

rampart of Elfland. It was made of the rarest lights that wander in air,

and the fairest flashes of sunlight that astonish our fields through

storm, and the mists of little streams, and the glow of flowers in

moonlight, and all the ends of our rainbows with all their beauty and

magic, and scraps of the gloaming of evenings long treasured in aged

minds. Into this enchantment he stepped to have done with mundane

things; but as his foot touched the twilight a hound that had sat behind

him under the hedge, held back from the chase so long, stretched its

body a little and uttered one of those low cries of impatience that

amongst the ways of man most nearly resembles a yawn. And old habit, at

that sound made Orion turn his head, and he saw the hound and went up to

him for a moment, and patted him and would have said farewell; but all

the hounds were around him then, nosing his hands and looking up at his

face. And standing there amongst his eager hounds, Orion, who but a

moment before was dreaming of fabulous things with thoughts that floated

over the magical lands and scaled the enchanted peaks of the Elfin

Mountains, was suddenly at the call of his earthly lineage. It was not

that he cared more to hunt than to be with his mother beyond the fret of

time, in the lands of her father lovelier than anything song hath said;

it was not that he loved his hounds so much that he could not leave

them; but his fathers had followed the chase age after age, as his

mother's line had timelessly followed magic; and the call towards magic

was strong while he looked on magical things, and the old earthly line

was as strong to beckon him to the chase. The beautiful boundary of

twilight had drawn his desires towards Elfland, next moment his hounds

had turned him another way: it is hard for any of us to avoid the grip

of external things.



For some moments Orion stood thinking among his hounds, trying to decide

which way to turn, trying to weigh the easy lazy ages, that hung over

untroubled lawns and the listless glories of Elfland, with the good

brown plough and the pasture and the little hedges of Earth. But the

hounds were around him, nosing, crying, looking into his eyes, speaking

to him if tails and paws and large brown eyes can speak, saying "Away!

Away!" To think amongst all that tumult was impossible; he could not

decide, and the hounds had it their way, and he and they went, together,

home over the fields we know.









                             CHAPTER XXII



                        _Orion Appoints a Whip_





And many times again, while the winter wore away, Orion went back again

with his hounds to that wonderful boundary, and waited there while the

earthly twilight faded; and sometimes saw the unicorns come through,

craftily, silently, when our fields were still, great beautiful shapes

of white. But he brought back no more horns to the castle of Erl, nor

hunted again across the fields we know; for the unicorns when they came

moved into our fields no more than a few bare paces, and Orion was not

able to cut one off again. Once when he tried he nearly lost all his

hounds, some being already within the boundary when he beat them back

with his whip; another two yards and the sound of his earthly horn could

never more have reached them. It was this that taught him that for all

the power that he had over his hounds, and even though in that power was

something of magic, yet one man without help could not hunt hounds, so

near to that edge over which if one should stray it would be lost

forever.



After this Orion watched the lads at their games in evenings at Erl,

till he had marked three that in speed and strength seemed to excel the

rest; and two of these he chose to be whippers-in. He went to the

cottage of one of them when the games were over, just as the lights were

lit, a tall lad with great speed of limb; the lad and his mother were

there and both rose from the table as the father opened the door and

Orion came in. And cheerily Orion asked the lad if he would come with

the hounds and carry a whip and prevent any from straying. And a silence

fell. All knew that Orion hunted strange beasts and took his hounds to

strange places. None there had ever stepped beyond the fields we know.

The lad feared to pass beyond them. His parents were full loth to let

him go. At length the silence was broken by excuses and muttered

sentences and unfinished things, and Orion saw that the lad would not

come.



He went then to the house of the other. There too the candles were lit

and a table spread. There were two old women there and the lad at their

supper. And to them Orion told how he needed a whipper-in, and asked the

lad to come. Their fear in that house was more marked. The old women

cried out together that the lad was too young, that he could not run so

well as he used to, that he was not worthy of so great an honour, that

dogs never would trust him. And much more than this they said, till they

became incoherent. Orion left them and went to the house of the third.

It was the same here. The elders had desired magic for Erl, but the

actual touch of it, or the mere thought of it, perturbed the folk in

their cottages. None would spare their sons to go whither they knew not,

to have dealings with things that rumour, like a large and sinister

shadow, had so grimly magnified in the hamlet of Erl. So Orion went

alone with his hounds when he took them up from the valley and went

eastwards over our fields where Earth's folk would not go.



It was late in the month of March, and Orion slept in his tower, when

there came up to him from far below, shrill and clear in the early

morning, the sound of his peacocks calling. The bleat of sheep far up on

the downs came to wake him too, and cocks were crowing clamourously, for

Spring was singing through the sunny air. He rose and went to his

hounds; and soon early labourers saw him go up the steep side of the

valley with all his hounds behind him, tan patches against the green.

And so he passed over the fields we know. And so he was come, before the

sun had set, to that strip of land from which all men turned away, where

westward stood men's houses among fields of fat brown clay and eastward

the Elfin Mountains shone over the boundary of twilight.



He went with his hounds along the last hedge, down to the boundary. And

no sooner had he come there than he saw a fox quite close slip out of

the twilight between Earth and Elfland, and run a few yards along the

edge of our fields and then slip back again. And of this Orion thought

nothing, for it is the way of the fox thus to haunt the edge of Elfland

and to return again to our fields: it is thus that he brings us

something of which none of our cities guess. But soon the fox appeared

again out of the twilight and ran a little way and was back in the

luminous barrier once more. Then Orion watched to see what the fox was

doing. And yet again it appeared in the field we know, and dodged back

into the twilight. And the hounds watched too, and showed no longing to

hunt it, for they had tasted fabulous blood.



Orion walked along beside the twilight in the direction in which the

fox was going, with his curiosity growing the more that the fox dodged

in and out of our fields. The hounds followed him slowly and soon lost

their interest in what the fox was doing. And all at once the curious

thing was explained, for Lurulu all of a sudden skipped through the

twilight, and that troll appeared in our fields: it was with him that

the fox was playing.



"A man," said Lurulu aloud to himself, or to his comrade the fox,

speaking in troll-talk. And all at once Orion remembered the troll that

had come into his nursery with his little charm against time, and had

leaped from shelf to shelf and across the ceiling and enraged

Ziroonderel who had feared for her crockery.



"The troll!" he said, also in troll-talk; for his mother had murmured it

to him as a child when she told him tales of the trolls and their

age-old songs.



"Who is this that knows troll-talk?" said Lurulu.



And Orion told his name, and this meant nothing to Lurulu. But he

squatted down and rummaged a little while in what answers in trolls to

our memory; and during his ransacking of much trivial remembrance that

had eluded the destruction of time in the fields we know, and the

listless apathy of unchanging ages in Elfland, he came all at once on

his remembrance of Erl; and looked at Orion again and began to cogitate.

And at this same moment Orion told to the troll the august name of his

mother. At once Lurulu made what is known amongst the trolls of Elfland

as the abasement of the five points; that is to say he bowed himself to

the ground on his two knees, his two hands and his forehead. Then he

sprang up again with a high leap into the air; for reverence rested not

on his spirit long.



"What are you doing in men's fields?" said Orion.



"Playing" said Lurulu.



"What do you do in Elfland?"



"Watch time," said Lurulu.



"That would not amuse me," said Orion.



"You've never done it," said Lurulu. "You cannot watch time in the

fields of men."



"Why not?" asked Orion.



"It moves too fast."



Orion pondered awhile on this but could make nothing of it; because,

never having gone from the fields we know, he knew only one pace of

time, and so had no means of comparison.



"How many years have gone over you," asked the troll, "since we spoke in

Erl?"



"Years?" said Orion.



"A hundred?" guessed the troll.



"Nearly twelve," said Orion. "And you?"



"It is still to-day" said the troll.



And Orion would not speak any more of time, for he cared not for the

discussion of a subject of which he appeared to know less than a common

troll.



"Will you carry a whip," he said, "and run with my hounds when we hunt

the unicorn over the fields we know."



Lurulu looked searchingly at the hounds, watching their brown eyes: the

hounds turned doubtful noses towards the troll and sniffed enquiringly.



"They are dogs," said the troll, as though that were against them. "Yet

they have pleasant thoughts."



"You will carry the whip then," said Orion.



"M, yes. Yes," said the troll.



So Orion gave him his own whip there and then, and blew his horn and

went away from the twilight, and told Lurulu to keep the hounds

together and to bring them on behind him.



And the hounds were uneasy at the sight of the troll, and sniffed and

sniffed again, but could not make him human, and were loth to obey a

creature no larger than them. They ran up to him through curiosity, and

ran away in disgust, and straggled through disobedience. But the

boundless resources of that nimble troll were not thus easily thwarted,

and the whip went suddenly up, looking three times as large in that tiny

hand, and the lash flew forward and cracked on the tip of a hound's

nose. The hound yelped, then looked astonished, and the rest were uneasy

still: they must have thought it an accident. But again the lash shot

forward and cracked on another nose-tip; and the hounds saw then that it

was not chance that guided those stinging shots, but a deadly unerring

eye. And from that time on they reverenced Lurulu, although he never

smelt human.



So went Orion and his pack of hounds in the late evening homewards, and

no sheep-dog kept the flock on wolf-haunted wold safer or closer than

Lurulu kept the pack: he was on each flank or behind them, wherever a

straggler was, and could leap right over the pack from side to side. And

the pale-blue Elfin Mountains faded from view before Orion had gone from

the frontier as much as a hundred paces, for their gloomless peaks were

hid by the earthly darkness that was deepening wide over the fields we

know.



Homeward they went, and soon there appeared above them the wandering

multitude of our earth-seen stars. Lurulu now and then looked up to

marvel at them, as we have all done at some time; but for the most part

he fixed his attention on the hounds, for now that he was in earthly

fields he was concerned with the things of Earth. And never one hound

loitered but that Lurulu's whip would touch him, with its tiny

explosion, perhaps on the tip of its tail, scattering a little dust of

fragments of hair and whipcord; and the hound would yelp and run in to

the others, and all the pack would know that another of those unerring

shots had gone home.



A certain grace with a whip, a certain sureness of aim, comes when a

life is devoted to the carrying of a whip amongst hounds; comes, say, in

twenty years. And sometimes it runs in families; and that is better than

years of practice. But neither years of practice nor the wont of the

whip in the blood can give the certain aim that one thing can; and that

one thing is magic. The hurl of the lash, as immediate as the sudden

turn of an eye, its flash to a chosen spot as direct as sight, were not

of this Earth. And though the cracks of that whip might have seemed to

passing men to be no more than the work of an earthly huntsman, yet not

a hound but knew that there was in it more than this, a thing from

beyond our fields.



There was a touch of dawn in the sky when Orion saw again the village of

Erl, sending up pillars of smoke from early fires below him, and came

with his hounds and his new whipper-in down the side of the valley.

Early windows winked at him as he went down the street and came in the

silence and chill to the empty kennels. And when the hounds were all

curled up on their straw he found a place for Lurulu, a mouldering loft

in which were sacks and a few heaps of hay: from a pigeon-loft just

beyond it some of the pigeons had strayed, and dwelt all along the

rafters. There Orion left Lurulu, and went to his tower, cold with the

want of sleep and food; and weary as he would not have been if he had

found a unicorn, but the noise of the troll's chatter when he had found

him on the frontier had made it useless to watch for those wary beasts

that evening. Orion slept. But the troll in the mouldering loft sat long

on his bundle of hay observing the ways of time. He saw through cracks

in old shutters the stars go moving by; he saw them pale: he saw the

other light spread; he saw the wonder of sunrise: he felt the gloom of

the loft all full of the coo of the pigeons; he watched their restless

ways: he heard wild birds stir in near elms, and men abroad in the

morning, and horses and carts and cows; and everything changing as the

morning grew. A land of change! The decay of the boards in the loft, and

the moss outside in the mortar, and old lumber mouldering away, all

seemed to tell the same story. Change and nothing abiding. He thought of

the age-old calm that held the beauty of Elfland. And then he thought of

the tribe of trolls he had left, wondering what they would think of the

ways of Earth. And the pigeons were suddenly terrified by wild peals of

Lurulu's laughter.









                             CHAPTER XXIII



              _Lurulu Watches the Restlessness of Earth_





As the day wore on and still Orion slept heavily, and even the hounds

lay silent in their kennels a little way off, and the coming and going

of men and carts below had nothing to do with the troll, Lurulu began to

feel lonely. So thick are the brown trolls in the dells they inhabit

that none feels lonely there. They sit there silent, enjoying the beauty

of Elfland or their own impudent thoughts, or at rare moments when

Elfland is stirred from its deep natural calm their laughter floods the

dells. They were no more lonely there than rabbits are. But in all the

fields of Earth there was only one troll; and that troll felt lonely.

The door of the pigeon loft was open some ten feet from the door of the

hayloft, and some six feet higher. A ladder led to the hayloft, clamped

to the wall with iron; but nothing at all communicated with the

pigeon-loft lest cats should go that way. From it came the murmur of

abundant life, which attracted the lonely troll. The jump from door to

door was nothing to him, and he landed in the pigeon-loft in his usual

attitude, with a look of impudent welcome upon his face. But the pigeons

poured away on a roar of wings through their windows, and the troll was

still lonely.



He liked the pigeon-loft as soon as he looked at it. He liked the signs

that he saw of teeming life, the hundred little houses of slate and

plaster, the myriad feathers, and the musty smell. He liked the age-old

ease of the sleepy loft, and the huge spiders-webs that draped the

corners, holding years and years of dust. He did not know what cobwebs

were, never having seen them in Elfland, but he admired their

workmanship.



The age of the pigeon-loft that had filled the corners with cobwebs, and

broken patches of plaster away from the wall, shewing ruddy bricks

beneath, and laid bare the laths in the roof and even the slates beyond,

gave to the dreamy place an air not unlike to the calm of Elfland; but

below it and all around Lurulu noted the restlessness of Earth. Even the

sunlight through the little ventilation-holes that shone on the wall

moved.



Presently there came the roar of the pigeons' returning wings and the

crash of their feet on the slate roof above him, but they did not yet

come in again to their homes. He saw the shadow of this roof cast on

another roof below him, and the restless shadows of the pigeons along

the edge. He observed the grey lichen covering most of the lower roof,

and the neat round patches of newer yellow lichen on the shapeless mass

of the grey. He heard a duck call out slowly six or seven times. He

heard a man come into a stable below him and lead a horse away. A hound

woke and cried out. Some jackdaws, disturbed from some tower, passed

over high in the air with boisterous voices. He saw big clouds go

hurrying along the tops of far hills. He heard a wild pigeon call from a

neighbouring tree. Some men went by talking. And after a while he

perceived to his astonishment what he had had no leisure to notice on

his previous visit to Erl, that even the shadows of houses moved; for he

saw that the shadow of the roof under which he sat had moved a little on

the roof below, over the grey and yellow lichen. Perpetual movement and

perpetual change! He contrasted it, in wonder, with the deep calm of his

home, where the moment moved more slowly than the shadows of houses

here, and did not pass until all the content with which a moment is

stored had been drawn from it by every creature in Elfland.



And then with a whirring and whining of wings the pigeons began to come

back. They came from the tops of the battlements of the highest tower of

Erl, on which they had sheltered awhile, feeling guarded by its great

height and its hoary age from this strange new thing that they feared.

They came back and sat on the sills of their little windows and looked

in with one eye at the troll. Some were all white, but the grey ones had

rainbow-coloured necks that were scarce less lovely than those colours

that made the splendour of Elfland; and Lurulu as they watched him

suspiciously where he sat still in a corner longed for their dainty

companionship. And, when these restless children of a restless air and

Earth still would not enter, he tried to soothe them with the

restlessness to which they were accustomed and in which he believed all

folk that dwelt in our fields delighted. He leaped up suddenly; he

sprang on to a slate-built house for a pigeon high on a wall; he darted

across to the next wall and back to the floor; but there was an outcry

of wings and the pigeons were gone. And gradually he learned that the

pigeons preferred stillness.



Their wings roared back soon to the roof; their feet thumped and clicked

on the slates again; but not for long did they return to their homes.

And the lonely troll looked out of their windows observing the ways of

Earth. He saw a water-wagtail light on the roof below him: he watched it

until it went. And then two sparrows came to some corn that had been

dropped on the ground: he noted them too. Each was an entirely new genus

to the troll, and he showed no more interest as he watched every

movement of the sparrows than should we if we met with an utterly

unknown bird. When the sparrows were gone the duck quacked again, so

deliberately that another ten minutes passed while Lurulu tried to

interpret what it was saying, and although he desisted then because

other interests attracted him he felt sure it was something important.

Then the jackdaws tumbled by again, but their voices sounded frivolous,

and Lurulu did not give them much attention. To the pigeons on the roof

that would not come home he listened long, not trying to interpret what

they were saying, yet satisfied with the case as the pigeons put it;

feeling that they told the story of life, and that all was well. And he

felt as he listened to the low talk of the pigeons that Earth must have

been going on for a long time.



Beyond the roofs the tall trees rose up, leafless except for evergreen

oaks and some laurels and pines and yews, and the ivy that climbed up

trunks, but the buds of the beech were getting ready to burst: and the

sunlight glittered and flashed on the buds and leaves, and the ivy and

laurel shone. A breeze passed by and some smoke drifted from some near

chimney. Far away Lurulu saw a huge grey wall of stone that circled a

garden all asleep in the sun; and clear in the sunlight he saw a

butterfly sail by, and swoop when it came to the garden. And then he saw

two peacocks go slowly past. He saw the shadow of the roofs darkening

the lower part of the shining trees. He heard a cock crow somewhere,

and a hound spoke out again. And then a sudden shower rained on the

roofs, and at once the pigeons wanted to come home. They alighted

outside their little windows again and all looked sideways at the troll;

Lurulu kept very still this time; and after a while the pigeons, though

they saw that he was by no means one of themselves, agreed that he did

not belong to the tribe of cat, and returned at last to the street of

their tiny houses and there continued their curious age-old tale. And

Lurulu longed to repay them with curious tales of the trolls, the

treasured legends of Elfland, but found that he could not make them

understand troll-talk. So he sat and listened to them talking, till it

seemed to him they were trying to lull the restlessness of Earth, and

thought that they might by drowsy incantation be putting some spell

against time, through which it could not come to harm their nests; for

the power of time was not made clear to him yet and he knew not yet that

nothing in our fields has the strength to hold out against time. The

very nests of the pigeons were built on the ruins of old nests, on a

solid layer of crumbled things that time had made in that pigeon-loft,

as outside it the strata are made from the ruins of hills. So vast and

ceaseless a ruin was not yet clear to the troll, for his sharp

understanding had only been meant to guide him through the lull and the

calm of Elfland, and he busied himself with a tinier consideration. For

seeing that the pigeons seemed now amicable he leapt back to his hayloft

and returned with a bundle of hay, which he put down in a corner to make

himself comfortable there. When the pigeons saw all this movement they

looked at him sideways again, jerking their necks queerly, but in the

end decided to accept the troll as a lodger; and he curled up on his hay

and listened to the history of Earth, which he believed the tale of the

pigeons to be, though he did not know their language.



But the day wore on and hunger came on the troll, far sooner than ever

it did in Elfland, where even when he was hungry he had no more to do

than to reach up and take the berries that hung low from the trees, that

grew in the forest that bordered the dells of the trolls. And it is

because the trolls eat them whenever hunger comes on them, which it

rarely does, that these curious fruits are called trollberries. He

leaped now from the pigeon-loft and scampered abroad, looking all round

for trollberries. And there were no berries at all, for there is but one

season for berries, as we know well; it is one of the tricks of time.

But that all the berries on Earth should pass away for a period was to

the troll too astounding to be comprehended at all. He was all among

farm-buildings, and presently he saw a rat humping himself slowly along

through a dark shed. He knew nothing of rat-talk; but it is a curious

thing that when any two folk are after the same thing, each somehow

knows what the other is after, at once, as soon as he sees him. We are

all partially blind to other folks' occupations, but when we meet anyone

engaged in our own pursuit then somehow we soon seem to know without

being told. And the moment that Lurulu saw the rat in the shed he seemed

to know that it was looking for food. So he followed the rat quietly.

And soon the rat came up to a sack of oats, and to open that took him no

longer than it does to shell a row of peas, and soon he was eating the

oats.



"Are they good?" said the troll in troll-talk.



The rat looked at him dubiously, noting his resemblance to man, and on

the other hand his unlikeness to dogs. But on the whole the rat was

dissatisfied, and after a long look turned away in silence and went out

of the shed. Then Lurulu ate the oats and found they were good.



When he had had enough oats the troll returned to the pigeon-loft, and

sat a long while there at one of the little windows looking out across

the roofs at the strange new ways of time. And the shadow upon the trees

went higher, and the glitter was gone from the laurels and all the lower

leaves. And then the light of the ivy-leaves and the holm-oaks turned

from silvery to pale gold. And the shadow went higher still. All the

world full of change.



An old man with a narrow long white beard came slowly to the kennels,

and opened the door and went in and fed the hounds with meat that he

brought from a shed. All the evening rang with the hounds' outcry. And

presently the old man came out again, and his slow departure seemed to

the watchful troll yet more of the restlessness of Earth.



And then a man came slowly leading a horse to the stable below the

pigeon-loft; and went away again and left the horse eating. The shadows

were higher now on walls and roofs and trees. Only the tree-tops and the

tip of a high belfry had the light any longer. The ruddy buds on high

beeches were glowing now like dull rubies. And a great serenity came in

the pale blue sky, and small clouds leisurely floating there turned to a

flaming orange, past which the rooks went homewards to some clump of

trees under the downs. It was a peaceful scene. And yet to the troll, as

he watched in the musty loft amongst generations of feathers, the noise

of the rooks and their multitude thronging the sky, the dull continual

sound of the horse eating, the leisurely sound now and then of homeward

feet, and the slow shutting of gates, seemed to be proof that nothing

ever rested in all the fields we know; and the sleepy lazy village that

dreamed in the Vale of Erl, and that knew no more of other lands than

their folk knew of its story, seemed to that simple troll to be a vortex

of restlessness.



And now the sunlight was gone from the highest places, and a moon a few

days old was shining over the pigeon-loft, out of sight of Lurulu's

window, but filling the air with a strange new tint. And all these

changes bewildered him, so that he thought awhile of returning to

Elfland, but the whim came again to his mind to astonish the other

trolls; and while this whim was on him he slipped down from the loft,

and went to find Orion.









                             CHAPTER XXIV



             _Lurulu Speaks of Earth and the Ways of Men_





The troll had found Orion in his castle and had laid his plan before

him. Briefly the plan was to have more whips for the pack. For one alone

could not always guard every hound from straying when they went to the

boundary of twilight, where but a few yards away lay spaces from which

if a hound ever came home, as lost hounds do at evening, it would come

home all worn and bedraggled with age for its half hour of straying.

Each hound, said Lurulu, should have its troll to guide it, and to run

with it when it hunted, and be its servant when it came home hungry and

muddy. And Orion had seen at once the unequalled advantage of having

each hound controlled by an alert if tiny intelligence, and had told

Lurulu to go for the trolls. So now, while the hounds were sleeping on

boards in a doggy mass in each of their kennels, for the dogs and the

bitches dwelt each in a separate house, the troll was scurrying over the

fields we know through twilight trembling on the verge of moonlight,

with his face turned toward Elfland.



He passed a white farm-house with a little window towards him that shone

bright yellow out of a wall pale blue with a tint that it had from the

moon. Two dogs barked at him and rushed out to chase him, and this troll

would have tricked them and mocked them on any other day, but now his

mind was full to the brim with his mission, and he heeded them no more

than a thistledown would have heeded them on a windy day of September,

and went on bouncing over the tips of the grasses till the pursuing dogs

were far behind and panting.



And long before the stars had paled from any touch of the dawn he came

to the barrier that divides our fields from the home of such things as

him, and leaping forward out of the earthly night, and high through the

barrier of twilight, he arrived on all fours on his natal soil in the

ageless day of Elfland. Through the gorgeous beauty of that heavy air

that outshines our lakes at sunrise, and leaves all our colours pale, he

scampered full of the news he had with which to astonish his kith. He

came to the moors of the trolls where they dwell in their queer

habitations, and uttered the squeaks as he went whereby the trolls

summon their folk; and he came to the forest in which the trolls have

made dwellings in boles of enormous trees; for there be trolls of the

forest and trolls of the moor, two tribes that are friendly and kin; and

there he uttered again the squeaks of the trolls' summons. And soon

there was a rustling of flowers throughout the deeps of the forest, as

though all four winds were blowing, and the rustling grew and grew, and

the trolls appeared, and sat down one by one near Lurulu. And still the

rustling grew, troubling the whole wood, and the brown trolls poured on

and sat down round Lurulu. From many a tree-bole, and hollows thick with

fern, they came tumbling in; and from the high thin gomaks afar on the

moors, to name as are named in Elfland those queer habitations for

which there is no earthly name, the odd grey cloth-like material draped

tent-wise about a pole. They gathered about him in the dim but

glittering light that floated amongst the fronds of those magical trees,

whose soaring trunks out-distanced our eldest pines, and shone on the

spikes of cacti of which our world little dreams. And when the brown

mass of the trolls was all gathered there, till the floor of the forest

looked as though an Autumn had come to Elfland, strayed out of the

fields we know, and when all the rustling had ceased and the silence was

heavy again as it had been for ages, Lurulu spoke to them telling them

tales of time.



Never before had such tales been heard in Elfland. Trolls had appeared

before in the fields we know, and had come back wondering: but Lurulu

amongst the houses of Erl had been in the midst of men; and time, as he

told the trolls, moved in the village with more wonderful speed than

ever it did in the grass of the fields of Earth. He told how the light

moved, he told of shadows, he told how the air was white and bright and

pale; he told how for a little while Earth began to grow like Elfland,

with a kinder light and the beginning of colours, and then just as one

thought of home the light would blink away and the colours be gone. He

told of stars. He told of cows and goats and the moon, three horned

creatures that he found curious. He had found more wonder in Earth than

we remember, though we also saw these things once for the first time;

and out of the wonder he felt at the ways of the fields we know, he made

many a tale that held the inquisitive trolls and gripped them silent

upon the floor of the forest, as though they were indeed a fall of brown

leaves in October that a frost had suddenly bound. They heard of

chimneys and carts for the first time: with a thrill they heard of

windmills. They listened spell-bound to the ways of men; and every now

and then, as when he told of hats, there ran through the forest a wave

of little yelps of laughter.



Then he said that they should see hats and spades and dog-kennels, and

look through casements and get to know the windmill; and a curiosity

arose in the forest amongst that brown mass of trolls, for their race is

profoundly inquisitive. And Lurulu stopped not here, relying on

curiosity alone to draw them from Elfland into the fields we know; but

he drew them also with another emotion. For he spoke of the haughty,

reserved, high, glittering unicorns, who tarry to speak to trolls no

more than cattle when they drink in pools of ours trouble to speak to

frogs. They all knew their haunts, they should watch their ways and tell

of these things to man, and the outcome of it would be that they should

hunt the unicorns with nothing less than dogs. Now however slight their

knowledge of dogs, the fear of dogs is--as I have said--universal

amongst all creatures that run; and they laughed gustily to think of the

unicorns being hunted with dogs. Thus Lurulu lured them toward Earth

with spite and curiosity; and knew that he was succeeding; and inwardly

chuckled till he was well warmed within. For amongst the trolls none

goes in higher repute than one that is able to astound the others, or

even to show them any whimsical thing, or to trick or perplex them

humorously. Lurulu had Earth to show, whose ways are considered, amongst

those able to judge, to be fully as quaint and whimsical as the curious

observer could wish.



Then up spake a grizzled troll; one that had crossed too often Earth's

border of twilight to watch the ways of men; and, while watching their

ways too long, time had grizzled him.



"Shall we go," he said, "from the woods that all folk know, and the

pleasant ways of the Land, to see a new thing, and be swept away by

time?" And there was a murmur among the trolls, that hummed away through

the forest and died out, as on Earth the sound of beetles going home.

"Is it not to-day?" he said. "But there they call it to-day, yet none

knows what it is: come back through the border again to look at it and

it is gone. Time is raging there, like the dogs that stray over our

frontier, barking, frightened and angry and wild to be home."



"It is even so," said the trolls, though they did not know; but this was

a troll whose words carried weight in the forest. "Let us keep to-day,"

said that weighty troll, "while we have it, and not be lured where

to-day is too easily lost. For every time men lose it their hair grows

whiter, their limbs grow weaker and their faces sadder, and they are

nearer still to to-morrow."



So gravely he spoke when he uttered that word "to-morrow" that the brown

trolls were frightened.



"What happens to-morrow?" one said.



"They die," said the grizzled troll. "And the others dig in their earth

and put them in, as I have seen them do, and then they go to Heaven, as

I have heard them tell." And a shudder went through the trolls far over

the floor of the forest.



And Lurulu who had sat angry all this while to hear that weighty troll

speak ill of Earth, where he would have them come, to astonish them with

its quaintness, spoke now in defence of Heaven.



"Heaven is a good place," he blurted hotly, though any tales he had

heard of it were few.



"All the blessed are there," the grizzled troll replied, "and it is full

of angels. What chance would a troll have there? The angels would catch

him, for they say on Earth that the angels all have wings; they would

catch a troll and smack him forever and ever."



And all the brown trolls in the forest wept.



"We are not so easily caught," Lurulu said.



"They have wings," said the grizzled troll.



And all were sorrowful and shook their heads, for they knew the speed of

wings.



The birds of Elfland mostly soared on the heavy air and eyed

everlastingly that fabulous beauty which to them was food and nest, and

of which they sometimes sang; but trolls playing along the border,

peering into the fields we know, had seen the dart and the swoop of

earthly birds, wondering at them as we wonder at heavenly things, and

knew that if wings were after him a poor troll would scarcely escape.

"Welladay," said the trolls.



The grizzled troll said no more, and had no need to, for the forest was

full of their sadness as they sat thinking of Heaven and feared that

they soon might come there if they dared to inhabit Earth.



And Lurulu argued no more. It was not a time for argument, for the

trolls were too sad for reason. So he spoke gravely to them of solemn

things, uttering learned words and standing in reverend attitude. Now

nothing rejoices the trolls as learning does and solemnity, and they

will laugh for hours at a reverend attitude or any semblance of gravity.

Thus he won them back again to the levity that is their natural mood.

And when this was accomplished he spoke again of Earth, telling

whimsical stories of the ways of man.



I do not wish to write the things that Lurulu said of man, lest I

should hurt my reader's self-esteem, and thereby injure him or her whom

I seek only to entertain; but all the forest rippled and squealed with

laughter. And the grizzled troll was able to say no more to check the

curiosity which was growing in all that multitude to see who it was that

lived in houses and had a hat immediately above him and a chimney higher

up, and spoke to dogs and would not speak to pigs, and whose gravity was

funnier than anything trolls could do. And the whim was on all those

trolls to go at once to Earth, and see pigs and carts and windmills and

laugh at man. And Lurulu who had told Orion that he would bring a score

of trolls, was hard set to keep the whole brown mass from coming, so

quickly change the moods and whims of the trolls: had he let them all

have their way there were no trolls left in Elfland, for even the

grizzled troll had changed his mind with the rest. Fifty he chose and

led them towards Earth's perilous frontier; and away they scurried out

of the gloom of the forest, as a whirl of brown oak-leaves scurries on

days of November's worst.









                              CHAPTER XXV



                _Lirazel Remembers the Fields We Know_





As the trolls scurried earthwards to laugh at the ways of man, Lirazel

stirred where she sat on her father's knee, who grave and calm on his

throne of mist and ice had hardly moved for twelve of our earthly years.

She sighed and the sigh rippled over the fells of dream and lightly

troubled Elfland. And the dawns and the sunsets and twilight and the

pale blue glow of stars, that are blended together forever to be the

light of Elfland, felt a faint touch of sorrow and all their radiance

shook. For the magic that caught these lights and the spells that bound

them together, to illumine forever the land that owes no allegiance to

Time, were not so strong as a sorrow rising dark from a royal mood of a

princess of the elvish line. She sighed, for through her long content

and across the calm of Elfland there had floated a thought of Earth; so

that in the midmost splendours of Elfland, of which song can barely

tell, she called to mind common cowslips, and many a trivial weed of the

fields we know. And walking in those fields she saw in fancy Orion, upon

the other side of the boundary of twilight, remote from her by she knew

not what waste of years. And the magical glories of Elfland and its

beauty beyond our dreaming, and the deep deep calm in which ages slept,

unhurt unhurried by time, and the art of her father that guarded the

least of the lilies from fading, and the spells by which he made

day-dreams and yearnings true, held her fancy no longer from roving nor

contented her any more. And so her sigh blew over the magical land and

slightly troubled the flowers.



And her father felt her sorrow and knew that it troubled the flowers and

knew that it shook the calm that lay upon Elfland, though no more than a

bird would shake a regal curtain, fluttering against its folds, when

wandering lost upon a Summer's night. And though he knew too it was but

for Earth that she sorrowed, preferring some mundane way to the midmost

glories of Elfland, as she sat with him on the throne that may only be

told of in song, yet even this moved nothing in his magical heart but

compassion; as we might pity a child who in fanes that to us seemed

sacred might be found to be sighing for some trivial thing. And the more

that Earth seemed to him unworthy of sorrow, being soon come soon gone,

the helpless prey of time, an evanescent appearance seen off the coasts

of Elfland, too brief for the graver care of a mind weighted with magic,

the more he pitied his child for her errant whim that had rashly

wandered here, and become entangled--alas--with the things that pass

away. Ah, well! she was not content. He felt no wrath against Earth that

had lured her fancies away: she was not content with the innermost

splendours of Elfland, but she sighed for something more: his tremendous

art should give it. So he raised his right arm up from the thing whereon

it rested, a part of his mystical throne that was made of music and

mirage; he raised his right arm up and a hush fell over Elfland.



The great leaves ceased from their murmur through the green deeps of the

forest; silent as carven marble were fabulous bird and monster; and the

brown trolls scampering earthwards all halted suddenly hushed. Then out

of the hush rose little murmurs of yearning, little sounds as of longing

for things that no songs can say, sounds like the voices of tears if

each little salt drop could live, and be given a voice to tell of the

ways of grief. Then all these little rumours danced gravely into a

melody that the master of Elfland called up with his magical hand. And

the melody told of dawn coming up over infinite marshes, far away upon

Earth or some planet that Elfland did not know; growing slowly out of

deep darkness and starlight and bitter cold; powerless, chilly and

cheerless, scarce overcoming the stars; obscured by shadows of thunder

and hated by all things dark; enduring, growing and glowing; until

through the gloom of the marshes and across the chill of the air came

all in a glorious moment the splendour of colour; and dawn went onward

with this triumphant thing, and the blackest clouds turned slowly rose

and rode in a sea of lilac, and the darkest rocks that had guarded night

shone now with a golden glow. And when his melody could say no more of

this wonder, that had forever been foreign to all the elvish dominions,

then the King moved his hand where he held it high, as one might beckon

to birds, and called up a dawn over Elfland, luring it from some planet

of those that are nearest the sun. And fresh and fair though it came

from beyond the bourn of geography, and out of an age long lost and

beyond history's ken, a dawn glowed upon Elfland that had known no dawn

before. And the dewdrops of Elfland slung from the bended tips of the

grasses gathered in that dawn to their tiny spheres and held there

shining and wonderful that glory of skies such as ours, the first they

had ever seen.



And the dawn grew strangely and slowly over those unwonted lands,

pouring upon them the colours that day after day our daffodils, and day

after day our wild roses, through all the weeks of their season, drink

deep with voluptuous assemblies in utterly silent riot. And a gleam that

was new to the forest appeared on the long strange leaves, and shadows

unknown to Elfland slipped out from the monstrous tree-boles, and stole

over grasses that had not dreamed of their advent; and the spires of

that palace perceiving a wonder, less lovely indeed than they, yet knew

that the stranger was magic, and uttered an answering gleam from their

sacred windows, that flashed over elvish fells like an inspiration and

mingled a flush of rose with the blue of the Elfin Mountains. And

watchers on wonderful peaks that gazed from their crags for ages, lest

from Earth or from any star should come a stranger to Elfland, saw the

first blush of the sky as it felt the coming of dawn, and raised their

horns and blew that call that warned Elfland against a stranger. And the

guardians of savage valleys lifted horns of fabulous bulls and blew the

call again in the dark of their awful precipices, and echo carried it on

from the monstrous marble faces of rocks that repeated the call to all

their barbarous company; so Elfland rang with the warning that a strange

thing troubled her coasts. And to the land thus expectant, thus

watchful, with magical sabres elate along lonely crags, summoned from

blackened scabbards by those horns to repel an enemy, dawn came now wide

now golden, the old old wonder we know. And the palace with every

marvel and with all its charms and enchantments flashed out of its

ice-blue radiance a glory of welcome or rivalry, adding to Elfland a

splendour of which only song may say.



It was then that the elfin King moved his hand again, where he held it

high by the crystal spires of his crown, and waved a way through the

walls of his magical palace, and showed to Lirazel the unmeasured

leagues of his kingdom. And she saw by magic, for so long as his fingers

made that spell; the dark green forests and all the fells of Elfland,

and the solemn pale-blue mountains and the valleys that weird folk

guarded, and all the creatures of fable that crept in the dark of huge

leaves, and the riotous trolls as they scampered away towards Earth: she

saw the watchers lift their horns to their lips, while there flashed a

light on the horns that was the proudest triumph of the hidden art of

her father, the light of a dawn lured over unthinkable spaces to appease

his daughter and comfort her whims and recall her fancies from Earth.

She saw the lawns whereon Time had idled for centuries, withering not

one bloom of all the boundary of flowers; and the new light coming upon

the lawns she loved, through the heavy colour of Elfland, gave them a

beauty that they had never known until dawn made this boundless journey

to meet the enchanted twilight; and all the while there glowed and

flashed and glittered those palace spires of which only song may tell.

From that bewildering beauty he turned his eyes away, and looked in his

daughter's face to see the wonder with which she would welcome her

glorious home as her fancies came back from the fields of age and death,

whither--alas--they had wandered. And though her eyes were turned to the

Elfin Mountains, whose mystery and whose blue they strangely matched,

yet as the Elf King looked in those eyes for which alone he had lured

the dawn so far from its natural courses, he saw in their magical deeps

a thought of Earth! A thought of Earth, though he had lifted his arm and

made a mystical sign with all his might to bring a wonder to Elfland

that should content her with home. And all his dominions had exulted in

this, and the watchers on awful crags had blown strange calls, and

monster and insect and bird and flower had rejoiced with a new joy, and

there in the centre of Elfland his daughter thought of Earth.



Had he shown her any wonder but dawn he might have lured home that

fancy, but in bringing this exotic beauty to Elfland to blend with its

ancient wonders, he awoke memories of morning coming over fields that he

knew not, and Lirazel played in fancy in fields once more with Orion,

where grew the unenchanted earthly flowers amongst the English grasses.



"Is it not enough?" he said in his strange rich magical voice, and

pointed across his wide lands with the fingers that summoned wonder.



She sighed: it was not enough.



And sorrow came upon that enchanted King: he had only his daughter, and

she sighed for Earth. There had been once a queen that had reigned with

him over Elfland; but she was mortal, and being mortal died. For she

would often stray to the hills of Earth to see the may again, or to see

the beechwoods in Autumn; and though she stayed but a day when she came

to the fields we know, and was back in the palace beyond the twilight

before our sun had set, yet Time found her whenever she came; and so she

wore away, and soon she died in Elfland; for she was only a mortal. And

wondering elves had buried her, as one buries the daughters of men. And

now the King was all alone with his daughter, and she had just sighed

for Earth. Sorrow was on him, but out of the dark of that sorrow arose,

as often with men, and went up singing out of his mourning mind, an

inspiration gleaming with laughter and joy. He stood up then and raised

up both his arms and his inspiration broke over Elfland in music. And

with the tide of that music there went like the strength of the sea an

impulse to rise and dance which none in Elfland resisted. Gravely he

waved his arms and the music floated from them; and all that stalked

through the forest and all that crept upon leaves, all that leaped among

craggy heights or browsed upon acres of lilies, all things in all manner

of places, yea the sentinel guarding his presence, the lonely

mountain-watchers and the trolls as they scampered towards Earth, all

danced to a tune that was made of the spirit of Spring, arrived on an

earthly morning amongst happy herds of goats.



And the trolls were very near to the frontier now, their faces already

puckered to laugh at the ways of men; they were hurrying with all the

eagerness of small vain things to be over the twilight that lies between

Elfland and Earth: now they went forward no longer, but only glided in

circles and intricate spirals, dancing some such dance as the gnats in

Summer evenings dance over the fields we know. And grave monsters of

fable in deeps of the ferny forest danced minuets that witches had made

of their whims and their laughter, long ago long ago in their youth

before cities had come to the world. And the trees of the forest heavily

lifted slow roots out of the ground and swayed upon them uncouthly and

then danced as on monstrous claws, and the insects danced on the huge

waving leaves. And in the dark of long caverns weird things in

enchanted seclusion rose out of their age-long sleep and danced in the

damp.



And beside the wizard King stood, swaying slightly to the rhythm that

had set dancing all magical things, the Princess Lirazel with that faint

gleam on her face that shone from a hidden smile; for she secretly

smiled forever at the power of her great beauty. And all in a sudden

moment the Elf King raised one hand higher and held it high and stilled

all that danced in Elfland, and gripped by a sudden awe all magical

things, and sent over Elfland a melody all made of notes he had caught

from wandering inspirations that sing and stray through limpid blue

beyond our earthly coasts: and all the land lay deep in the magic of

that strange music. And the wild things that Earth has guessed at and

the things hidden even from legend were moved to sing age-old songs that

their memories had forgotten. And fabulous things of the air were lured

downwards out of great heights. And emotions unknown and unthought of

troubled the calm of Elfland. The flood of music beat with wonderful

waves against the slopes of the grave blue Elfin Mountains, till their

precipices uttered strange bronze-like echoes. On Earth no noise was

heard of music or echo: not a note came through the narrow border of

twilight, not a sound, not a murmur. Elsewhere those notes ascended, and

passed like rare strange moths through all the fields of Heaven, and

hummed like untraceable memories about the souls of the blessed; and the

angels heard that music but were forbidden to envy it. And though it

came not to Earth, and though never our fields have heard the music of

Elfland, yet there were then as there have been in every age, lest

despair should overtake the peoples of Earth, those that make songs for

the need of our grief and our laughter: and even they heard never a note

from Elfland across the border of twilight that kills their sound, but

they felt in their minds the dance of those magical notes, and wrote

them down and earthly instruments played them; then and never till then

have we heard the music of Elfland.



For a while the Elf King held all things that owed him allegiance, and

all their desires and wonders and fears and dreams, floating drowsy on

tides of music that was made of no sounds of Earth, but rather of that

dim substance in which the planets swim, with many another marvel that

only magic knows. And then as all Elfland was drinking the music in, as

our Earth drinks in soft rain, he turned again to his daughter with that

in his eyes that said "What land is so fair as ours?" And she turned

towards him to say "Here is my home forever." Her lips were parted to

say it and love was shining in the blue of her elfin eyes; she was

stretching her fair hands out towards her father; when they heard the

sound of the horn of a tired hunter, wearily blowing by the border of

Earth.









                             CHAPTER XXVI



                         _The Horn of Alveric_





Northward to lonely lands through wearying years Alveric wandered, where

windy fragments of his grey gaunt tent added a gloom to chill evenings.

And the folk upon lonely farms, as they lit the lights in their houses,

and the ricks began to darken against the pale green of the sky, would

sometimes hear the rap of the mallets of Niv and Zend coming clear

through the hush from the land that no others trod. And their children

peering from casements to see if a star was come would see perhaps the

queer grey shape of that tent flapping its tatters above the last of the

hedgerows, where a moment before was only the grey of the gloaming. On

the next morning there would be guesses and wonderings, and the joy and

fear of the children, and the tales that their elders told them, and the

explorations by stealth to the edge of the fields of men, shy peerings

through dim green gaps in the last of the hedgerows (though to look

toward the East was forbidden), and rumours and expectations; and all

these things were blended together by this wonder that came from the

East, and so passed into legend, which lived for many a year beyond

that morning; but Alveric and his tent would be gone.



So day by day and season after season that company wandered on, the

lonely mateless man, the moonstruck lad and the madman, and that old

grey tent with its long twisted pole. And all the stars became known to

them, and all the four winds familiar, and rain and mist and hail, but

the flow of yellow windows all warm and welcome at night they knew only

to say farewell to: with the earliest light in the first chill of dawn

Alveric would awake from impatient dreams, and Niv would arise shouting,

and away they would go upon their crazed crusade before any sign of

awakening appeared on the quiet dim gables. And every morning Niv

prophesied that they would surely find Elfland; and the days wore away

and the years.



Thyl had long left them; Thyl who prophesied victory to them in burning

song, whose inspirations cheered Alveric on coldest nights and led him

through rockiest ways, Thyl sang one evening suddenly songs of some

young girl's hair, Thyl who should have led their wanderings. And then

one day in the gloaming, a blackbird singing, the may in bloom for

miles, he turned for the houses of men, and married the maiden and was

one no more with any band of wanderers.



The horses were dead; Niv and Zend carried all they had on the pole.

Many years had gone. One Autumn morning Alveric left the camp to go to

the houses of men. Niv and Zend eyed each other. Why should Alveric seek

to ask the way of others? For somehow or other their mad minds knew his

purpose more swiftly than sane intuitions. Had he not Niv's prophecies

to guide him, and the things that Zend had been told on oath by the full

moon?



Alveric came to the houses of men, and of the folk he questioned few

would speak at all of things that lay to the East, and if he spoke of

the lands through which he had wandered for years they gave as little

heed as if he were telling them that he had pitched his tent on the

coloured layers of air that glowed and drifted and darkened in the low

sky over the sunset. And the few that answered him said one thing only:

that only the wizards knew.



When he had learned this Alveric went back from the fields and hedgerows

and came again to his old grey tent in the lands of which none thought;

and Niv and Zend sat there silent, eying him sideways, for they knew he

mistrusted madness and things said by the moon. And next day when they

moved their camp in the chill of dawn Niv led the way without shouting.



They had not gone for many more weeks upon their curious journey when

Alveric met one morning, at the edge of the fields men tended, one

filling his bucket at a well, whose thin high conical hat and mystical

air proclaimed him surely a wizard. "Master," said Alveric, "of those

arts men dread, I have a question that I would ask of the future."



And the wizard turned from his bucket to look at Alveric with doubtful

eyes, for the traveller's tattered figure seemed scarce to promise such

fees as are given by those that justly question the future. And, such as

those fees are, the wizard named them. And Alveric's wallet held that

which banished the doubts of the wizard. So that he pointed to where the

tip of his tower peered over a cluster of myrtles, and prayed Alveric to

come to his door when the evening star should appear; and in that

propitious hour he would make the future clear to him.



And again Niv and Zend knew well that their leader followed after dreams

and mysteries that came not from madness nor from the moon. And he left

them sitting still and saying nothing, but with minds full of fierce

visions.



Through pale air waiting for the evening star Alveric walked over the

fields men tended, and came to the dark oak door of the wizard's tower

which myrtles brushed against with every breeze. A young apprentice in

wizardry opened the door and, by ancient wooden steps that the rats knew

better than men, led Alveric to the wizard's upper room.



The wizard had on a silken cloak of black, which he held to be due to

the future; without it he would not question the years to be. And when

the young apprentice had gone away he moved to a volume he had on a high

desk, and turned from the volume to Alveric to ask what he sought of the

future. And Alveric asked him how he should come to Elfland. Then the

wizard opened the great book's darkened cover and turned the pages

therein, and for a long while all the pages he turned were blank, but

further on in the book much writing appeared, although of no kind that

Alveric had ever seen. And the wizard explained that such books as these

told of all things; but that he, being only concerned with the years to

be, had no need to read of the past, and had therefore acquired a book

that told of the future only; though he might have had more than this

from the College of Wizardry, had he cared to study the follies already

committed by man.



Then he read for a while in his book, and Alveric heard the rats

returning softly to the streets and houses that they had made in the

stairs. And then the wizard found what he sought of the future, and told

Alveric that it was written in his book how he never should come to

Elfland while he carried a magical sword.



When Alveric heard this he paid the wizard's fees and went away doleful.

For he knew the perils of Elfland, which no common sabre forged on the

anvils of men could ever avail to parry. He did not know that the magic

that was in his sword left a flavour or taste on the air like that of

lightning, which passed through the border of twilight and spread over

Elfland, nor knew that the Elf King learned of his presence thus and

drew his frontier away from him, so that Alveric should trouble his

realm no more; but he believed what the wizard had read to him out of

his book, and so went doleful away. And, leaving the stairs of oak to

time and the rats, he passed out of the grove of myrtles and over the

fields of men, and came again to that melancholy spot where his grey

tent brooded mournfully in the wilderness, dull and silent as Niv and

Zend sitting beside it. And after that they turned and wandered

southwards, for all journeys now seemed equally hopeless to Alveric, who

would not give up his sword to meet magical perils without magical aid;

and Niv and Zend obeyed him silently, no longer guiding him with raving

prophesies or with things said by the moon, for they knew he had taken

counsel with another.



By weary ways with lonely wanderings they came far to the South, and

never the border of Elfland appeared with its heavy layers of twilight;

yet Alveric would never give up his sword, for well he guessed that

Elfland dreaded its magic, and had poor hope of recapturing Lirazel with

any blade that was dreadful only to men. And after a while Niv

prophesied again, and Zend would come late on nights of the full moon to

wake Alveric with his tales. And for all the mystery that was in Zend

when he spoke, and for all the exultation of Niv when he prophesied,

Alveric knew by now that the tales and the prophecies were empty and

vain and that neither of these would ever bring him to Elfland. With

this mournful knowledge in a desolate land he still struck camp at dawn,

still marched, still sought for the frontier, and so the months went by.



And one day where the edge of Earth was a wild untended heath, running

down to the rocky waste in which Alveric had camped, he saw at evening a

woman in the hat and cloak of a witch sweeping the heath with a broom.

And each stroke as she swept the heath was away from the fields we know,

away to the rocky waste, eastwards towards Elfland. Big gusts of black

dried earth and puffs of sand were blowing towards Alveric from every

powerful stroke. He walked towards her from his sorry encampment and

stood near and watched her sweeping; but still she laboured at her

vigorous work, striding away behind dust from the fields we know, and

sweeping as she strode. And after a while she lifted her face as she

swept and looked at Alveric, and he saw that it was the witch

Ziroonderel. After all these years he saw that witch again, and she saw

beneath the flapping rags of his cloak that sword that she had made for

him once on her hill. Its scabbard of leather could not hide from the

witch that it was that very sword, for she knew the flavour of magic

that rose from it faintly and floated wide through the evening.



"Mother Witch!" said Alveric.



And she curtsied low to him, magical though she was and aged by the

passing of years that had been before Alveric's father, and though many

in Erl had forgotten their lord by now; yet she had not forgotten.



He asked her what she was doing there, on the heath with her broom in

the evening.



"Sweeping the world," she said.



And Alveric wondered what rejected things she was sweeping away from the

world, with grey dust mournfully turning over and over as it drifted

across our fields, going slowly into the darkness that was gathering

beyond our coasts.



"Why are you sweeping the world, Mother Witch?" he said.



"There's things in the world that ought not to be here," said she.



He looked wistfully then at the rolling grey clouds from her broom that

were all drifting towards Elfland.



"Mother Witch," he said, "can I go too? I have looked for twelve years

for Elfland, and have not found a glimpse of the Elfin Mountains."



And the old witch looked kindly at him, and then she glanced at his

sword.



"He's afraid of my magic," she said; and thought or mystery dawned in

her eyes as she spoke.



"Who?" said Alveric.



And Ziroonderel lowered her eyes.



"The King," she said.



And then she told him how that enchanted monarch would draw away from

whatever had worsted him once, and with him draw all that he had, never

supporting the presence of any magic that was the equal of his.



And Alveric could not believe that such a king cared so much for the

magic he had in his old black scabbard.



"It is his way," she said.



And then he would not believe that he had waved away Elfland.



"He has the power," said she.



And still Alveric would face this terrible king and all the powers he

had; but wizard and witch had warned him that he could not go with his

sword, and how go unarmed through the grizzly wood against the palace of

wonder? For to go there with any sword from the anvils of men was but to

go unarmed.



"Mother Witch," he cried. "May I come no more to Elfland?"



And the longing and grief in his voice touched the witch's heart and

moved it to magical pity.



"You shall go," she said.



He stood there half despair in the mournful evening, half dreams of

Lirazel. While the witch from under her cloak drew forth a small false

weight which once she had taken away from a seller of bread.



"Draw this along the edge of your sword," she said, "all the way from

hilt to point, and it will disenchant the blade, and the King will never

know what sword is there."



"Will it still fight for me?" said Alveric.



"No," said the witch. "But once you are over the frontier take this

script and wipe the blade with it on every spot that the false weight

has touched." And she fumbled under her cloak again and drew forth a

poem on parchment. "It will enchant it again," she said.



And Alveric took the weight and the written thing.



"Let not the two touch," warned the witch.



And Alveric set them apart.



"Once over the frontier," she said, "and he may move Elfland where he

will, but you and the sword will be within his borders."



"Mother Witch," said Alveric, "will he be wroth with you if I do this?"



"Wroth!" said Ziroonderel. "Wroth? He will rage with a most exceeding

fury, beyond the power of tigers."



"I would not bring that on you, Mother Witch," said Alveric.



"Ha!" said Ziroonderel. "What care I?"



Night was advancing now, and the moor and the air growing black like the

witch's cloak. She was laughing now and merging into the darkness. And

soon the night was all blackness and laughter; but he could see no

witch.



Then Alveric made his way back to his rocky camp by the light of its

lonely fire.



And as soon as morning appeared on the desolation, and all the useless

rocks began to glow, he took the false weight and softly rubbed it along

both sides of his sword until all its magical edge was disenchanted. And

he did this in his tent while his followers slept, for he would not let

them know that he sought for help that came not from the ravings of Niv,

nor from any sayings that Zend had had from the moon.



Yet the troubled sleep of madness is not so deep that Niv did not watch

him out of one wild sly eye when he heard the false weight softly

rasping the sword.



And when this was secretly done and secretly watched, Alveric called to

his two men, and they came and folded up his tattered tent, and took the

long pole and hung their sorry belongings upon it; and on went Alveric

along the edge of the fields we know, impatient to come at last to the

land that so long eluded him. And Niv and Zend came behind with the pole

between them, with bundles swinging from it and tatters flying.



They moved inland a little towards the houses of men to purchase the

food they needed; and this they bought in the afternoon from a farmer

who dwelt in a lonely house, so near to the very edge of the fields we

know that it must have been the last house in the visible world. And

here they bought bread and oatmeal, and cheese and a cured ham, and

other such things, and put them in sacks and slung them over their pole;

then they left the farmer and turned away from his fields and from all

the fields of men. And as evening fell they saw just over a hedge,

lighting up the land with a soft strange glow that they knew to be not

of this Earth, that barrier of twilight that is the frontier of Elfland.



"Lirazel!" shouted Alveric, and drew his sword and strode into the

twilight. And behind him went Niv and Zend, with all their suspicions

flaming now into jealousy of inspirations or magic that were not theirs.



Once he called Lirazel; then, little trusting his voice in that wide

weird land, he lifted his hunter's horn that hung by his side on a

strap, he lifted it to his lips and sounded a call weary with so much

wandering. He was standing within the edge of the boundary; the horn

shone in the light of Elfland.



Then Niv and Zend dropped their pole in that unearthly twilight, where

it lay like the wreckage of some uncharted sea, and suddenly seized

their master.



"A land of dreams!" said Niv. "Have I not dreams enough?"



"There is no moon there!" cried Zend.



Alveric struck Zend on the shoulder with his sword, but the sword was

disenchanted and blunt and only harmed him slightly. Then the two seized

the sword and dragged Alveric back. And the strength of the madman was

beyond what one could believe. They dragged him back again to the fields

we know, where they two were strange and were jealous of other

strangeness, and led him far from the sight of the pale-blue mountains.

He had not entered Elfland.



But his horn had passed the boundary's edge and troubled the air of

Elfland, uttering across its dreamy calm one long sad earthly note: it

was the horn that Lirazel heard as she spoke with her father.









                             CHAPTER XXVII



                        _The Return of Lurulu_





Over hamlet and Castle of Erl, and through every nook and crevice of it,

Spring passed; a mild benediction that blessed the very air and sought

out all living things; not missing even the tiny plants that had their

dwelling in most secluded places, under eaves, in the cracks of old

barrels, or along the lines of mortar that held ancient rows of stones.

And in this season Orion hunted no unicorns; not that he knew in what

season the unicorns bred in Elfland, where time is not as here; but

because of a feeling he had from all his earthly forefathers against

hunting any creature in this season of song and flowers. So he tended

his hounds and often watched the hills, expecting on any day the return

of Lurulu.



And Spring passed by and the Summer flowers grew, and still there was no

sign of the troll returning, for time moves through the dells of Elfland

as over no field of man. And long Orion watched through fading evenings

till the line of the hills was black, yet never saw the small round

heads of trolls bobbing across the downs.



And the long autumnal winds came sighing out of cold lands, and found

Orion still watching for Lurulu; and the mist and the turning leaves

spoke to his heart of hunting. And the hounds were whining for the open

spaces and the line of scent like a mysterious path crossing the wide

world, but Orion would hunt nothing less than unicorns, and waited yet

for his trolls.



And one of these earthly days, with a menace of frost in the air and a

scarlet sunset, Lurulu's talk to the trolls in the wood being finished,

and their scamper swifter than hares having brought them soon to the

frontier, those in our fields who looked (as they seldom did) towards

that mysterious border where Earth ended might have seen the unwonted

shapes of the nimble trolls coming all grey through the evening. They

came dropping, troll after troll, from the soaring leaps they took high

through the boundary of twilight; and, landing thus unceremoniously in

our fields, came capering, somersaulting and running, with gusts of

impudent laughter, as though this were a proper manner in which to

approach by no means the least of the planets.



They rustled by the small houses like the wind passing through straw,

and none that heard the light rushing sound of their passing knew how

outlandish they were, except the dogs, whose work it is to watch, and

who know of all things that pass, their degree of remoteness to man. At

gipsies, tramps, and all that go without houses, dogs bark whenever they

pass; at the wild things of the woods they bark with greater abhorrence,

knowing well the rebellious contempt in which they hold man; at the fox,

for his touch of mystery and his far wanderings, they bark more

furiously: but to-night the barking of dogs was beyond all abhorrence

and fury; many a farmer this night believed that his dog was choking.



And passing over these fields, staying not to laugh at the clumsy scared

running of sheep, for they kept their laughter for man, they came soon

to the downs above Erl; and there below them was night and the smoke of

men, all grey together. And not knowing from what slight causes the

smoke arose, here from a woman boiling a kettle of water, or there

because one dried the frock of a child, or that a few old men might warm

their hands in the evening, the trolls forbore to laugh as they had

planned to do as soon as they should meet with the things of man.

Perhaps even they, whose gravest thoughts were just under the surface of

laughter, even they were a little awed by the strangeness and nearness

of man sleeping there in his hamlet with all his smoke about him. Though

awe in these light minds rested no longer than does the squirrel on the

thin extremest twigs.



In a while they lifted their eyes up from the valley, and there was the

western sky still shining above the last of the gloaming, a little strip

of colour and dying light, so lovely that they believed that another

elfland lay the other side of the valley, two dim diaphonous magical

elfin lands hemming in this valley and few fields of men close upon

either side. And, sitting there on the hillside peering westward, the

next thing they saw was a star: it was Venus low in the West brimming

with blueness. And they all bowed their heads many times to this

pale-blue beautiful stranger; for though politeness was rare with them

they saw that the Evening Star was nothing of Earth and no affair of

man's, and believed it came out of that elfland they did not know on the

western side of the world. And more and more stars appeared, till the

trolls were frightened, for they knew nothing of these glittering

wanderers that could steal out of the darkness and shine: at first they

said "There are more trolls than stars," and were comforted, for they

trusted greatly in numbers. Then there were soon more stars than trolls;

and the trolls were ill at ease as they sat in the dark underneath all

that multitude. But presently they forgot the fancy that troubled them,

for no thought remained with them long. They turned their light

attention instead to the yellow lights that glowed here and there on the

hither side of the greyness, where a few of the houses of men stood warm

and snug near the trolls. A beetle went by, and they hushed their

chatter to hear what he would say; but he droned by, going home, and

they did not know his language. A dog far off was ceaselessly crying

out, and filling all the still night with a note of warning. And the

trolls were angry at the sound of his voice, for they felt that he

interfered between them and man. Then a soft whiteness came out of the

night and lit on the branch of a tree, and bowed its head to the left

and looked at the trolls, and then bowed over to the right and looked at

them again from there, and then back to the left again for it was not

yet sure about them. "An owl," said Lurulu; and many besides Lurulu had

seen his kind before, for he flies much along the edge of Elfland. Soon

he was gone and they heard him hunting across the hills and the hollows;

and then no sound was left but the voices of men, or the shrill shouts

of children, and the bay of the dog that warned men against the trolls.

"A sensible fellow," they said of the owl, for they liked the sound of

his voice; but the voices of men and their dog sounded confused and

tiresome.



They saw sometimes the lights of late wayfarers crossing the downs

towards Erl, or heard men that cheered themselves in the lonely night by

singing, instead of by lantern's light. And all the while the Evening

Star grew bigger, and great trees grew blacker and blacker.



Then from underneath the smoke and the mist of the stream there boomed

all of a sudden the brazen bell of the Freer out of deep night in the

valley. Night and the slopes of Erl and the dark downs echoed with it;

and the echoes rode up to the trolls and seemed to challenge them, with

all accursed things and wandering spirits and bodies unblessed of the

Freer.



And the solemn sound of those echoes going alone through the night from

every heavy swing of the holy bell cheered that band of trolls among all

the strangeness of Earth, for whatever is solemn always moves trolls to

levity. They turned merrier now and tittered among themselves.



And while they still watched all that host of stars, wondering if they

were friendly, the sky grew steely blue and the eastern stars dwindled,

and the mist and the smoke of men turned white, and a radiance touched

the further edge of the valley; and the moon came up over the downs

behind the trolls. Then voices sang from the holy place of the Freer,

chaunting moon matins; which it was their wont to sing on nights of the

full moon while the moon was yet low. And this rite they named

moon's-morning. The bell had ceased, chance voices spoke no more, they

had hushed their dog in the valley and silenced his warning, and lonely

and grave and solemn that people's song floated up from before the

candles in their small square sacred place, built of grey stone by men

that were dead for ages and ages; all solemn the song welled up in the

time of the moon's rising, grave as the night, mysterious as the full

moon, and fraught with a meaning that was far beyond the highest

thoughts of the trolls. Then the trolls leaped up with one accord from

the frosted grass of the downs and all poured down the valley to laugh

at the ways of men, to mock at their sacred things and to dare their

singing with levity.



Many a rabbit rose up and fled from their onrush, and thrills of

laughter arose from the trolls at their fear. A meteor flashed

westwards, racing after the sun; either as a portent to warn the hamlet

of Erl that folk from beyond Earth's borders approached them now, or

else in fulfilment of some natural law. To the trolls it seemed that one

of the proud stars fell, and they rejoiced with elvish levity.



Thus they came giggling through the night, and ran down the street of

the village, unseen as any wild creature that roams late through the

darkness; and Lurulu led them to the pigeon-loft, and they all poured

clambering in. Some rumour arose in the village that a fox had jumped

into the pigeon-loft, but it ceased almost as soon as the pigeons

returned to their homes, and the folk of Erl had no more hint till the

morning that something had entered their village from beyond the borders

of Earth.



In a brown mass thicker than young pigs are along the edge of a trough

the trolls encumbered the floor of the pigeons' home. And time went over

them as over all earthly things. And well they knew, though tiny was

their intelligence, that by crossing the border of twilight they

incurred the wasting of time; for nothing dwells by the brink of any

danger and lives ignorant of its menace: as conies in rocky altitudes

know the peril of the sheer cliff, so they that dwell near Earth's

border knew well the danger of time. And yet they came. The wonder and

lure of Earth had been overstrong for them. Does not many a young man

squander youth as they squandered immortality?



And Lurulu showed them how to hold off time for a while, which otherwise

would make them older and older each moment and whirl them on with

Earth's restlessness all night long. Then he curled up his knees and

shut his eyes and lay still. This, he told them, was sleep; and,

cautioning them to continue to breathe, though being still in other

respects, he then slept in earnest: and after some vain attempts the

brown trolls did the same.



When sunrise came, awaking all earthly things, long rays came through

the thirty little windows and awoke both birds and trolls. And the mass

of trolls went to the windows to look at Earth, and the pigeons

fluttered to rafters and jerked sidelong looks at the trolls. And there

that heap of trolls would have stayed, crowded high on each other's

shoulders, blocking the windows while they studied the variety and

restlessness of Earth, finding them equal to the strangest fables that

wayfarers had brought to them out of our fields; and, though Lurulu

often reminded them, they had forgotten the haughty white unicorns that

they were to hunt with dogs.



But Lurulu after a while led them down from the loft and brought them to

the kennels. And they climbed up the high palings and peered over the

top at the hounds.



When the hounds saw those strange heads peering over the palings they

made a great uproar. And presently folk came to see what troubled the

hounds. And when they saw that mass of trolls all round the top of the

palings they said to each other, and so said all that heard of it:

"There is magic in Erl now."









                            CHAPTER XXVIII



                    _A Chapter on Unicorn-Hunting_





None in Erl was so busy but that he came that morning to see the magic

that was newly come out of Elfland, and to compare the trolls with all

that the neighbours said of them. And the folk of Erl gazed much at the

trolls and the trolls at the folk of Erl, and there was great merriment;

for, as often happens with minds of unequal weight, each laughed at the

other. And the villagers found the impudent ways of the bare brown

nimble trolls no funnier, no more meet for derision, than the trolls

found the grave high hats, the curious clothes, and the solemn air of

the villagers.



And Orion soon came too, and the folk of the village doffed their long

thin hats; and, though the trolls would have laughed at him also, Lurulu

had found his whip, and by means of it made the mob of his impudent

brethren give that salutation that is given in Elfland to those of its

royal line.



When noonday came, which was the hour of dinner, and the folk turned

from the kennels, they went back to their houses all praising the magic

that was come at last to Erl.



During the days that followed Orion's hounds learned that it was vain to

chase a troll and unwise to snarl at one; for, apart from their elvish

speed, the trolls were able to leap into the air far over the heads of

the hounds, and when each had been given a whip they could repay

snarling with an aim that none on Earth was able to equal, except those

whose sires had carried a whip with hounds for generations.



And one morning Orion came to the pigeon-loft and called to Lurulu

early, and he brought out the trolls and they went to the kennels and

Orion opened the doors, and he led them all away eastwards over the

downs. The hounds moved all together and the trolls with their whips ran

beside them, like a flock of sheep surrounded by numbers of collies.

They were away to the border of Elfland to wait for the unicorns where

they come through the twilight to eat the earthly grasses at evening.

And as our evening began to mellow the fields we know, they were come to

the opal border that shut those fields from Elfland. And there they

lurked as Earth's darkness grew, and waited for the great unicorns. Each

hound had its troll beside it with the troll's right hand along its

shoulder or neck, soothing it, calming it, and holding it still, while

the left hand held the whip: the strange group lingered there

motionless, and darkened there with the evening. And when Earth was as

dim and quiet as the unicorns desired the great creatures came softly

through, and were far into Earth before any troll would allow his hound

to move. Thus when Orion gave the signal they easily cut one off from

its elfin home and hunted it snorting over those fields that are the

portion of men. And night came down on the proud beast's magical gallop,

and the hounds intoxicate with that marvellous scent, and the leaping

soaring trolls.



And, when jackdaws on the highest towers of Erl saw the rim of the sun

all red above frosted fields, Orion came back from the downs with his

hounds and his trolls, carrying as fine a head as a unicorn-hunter could

wish. The hounds weary but glad were soon curled up in their kennels,

and Orion in his bed; while the trolls in their pigeon-loft began to

feel, as none but Lurulu had felt ever before, the weight and the

weariness of the passing of time.



All day Orion slept and all his hounds, none of them caring how it slept

or why; while the trolls slept anxiously, falling asleep as fast as ever

they could, in the hope of escaping some of the fury of time, which they

feared had begun to attack them. And that evening while still they

slept, hounds, trolls and Orion, there met again in the forge of Narl

the parliament of Erl.



From the forge to the inner room came the twelve old men, rubbing their

hands and smiling, ruddy with health and the keen North wind and the

cheerfulness of their forebodings; for they were well content at last

that their lord was surely magic, and foresaw great doings in Erl.



"Folklings," said Narl to them all, naming them thus after an ancient

wont, "is it not well with us and our valley at last? See how it is as

we planned so long ago. For our lord is a magic lord as we all desired,

and magical things have sought him from over there, and they all obey

his hests."



"It is so," said all but Gazic, a vendor of beeves.



Little and old and out-of-the-way was Erl, secluded in its deep valley,

unnoticed in history; and the twelve men loved the place and would have

it famous. And now they rejoiced as they heard the words of Narl, "What

other village," he said, "has traffic with over there?"



And Gazic, though he rejoiced with the rest, rose up in a pause of their

gladness. "Many strange things," he said, "have entered our village,

coming from over there. And it may be that human folk are best, and the

ways of the fields we know."



Oth scorned him, and Threl. "Magic is best," said all.



And Gazic was silent again, and raised his voice no more against the

many; and the mead went round, and all spoke of the fame of Erl; and

Gazic forgot his mood and the fear that was in it.



Far into the night they rejoiced, quaffing the mead, and by its homely

aid gazing into the years of the future, so far as that may be done by

the eyes of men. Yet all their rejoicing was hushed and their voices

low, lest the ears of the Freer should hear them; for their gladness

came to them from lands that lay beyond thought of salvation, and they

had set their trust in magic, against which, as well they knew, boomed

every note that rang from the bell of the Freer whenever it tolled at

evening. And they parted late, praising magic in no loud tones, and went

secretly back to their houses, for they feared the curse that the Freer

had called down upon unicorns, and knew not if their own names might

become involved in one of the curses called upon magical things.



All the next day Orion rested his hounds, and the trolls and the people

of Erl gazed at each other. But on the day that followed Orion took his

sword and gathered his band of trolls and his pack of hounds, and all

were away once more far over the downs, to come again to the border of

nebulous opal and to lurk for the unicorns coming through in the

evening.



They came to a part of the border far from the spot which they had

disturbed only three evenings before; and Orion was guided by the

chattering trolls, for well they knew the haunts of the lonely unicorns.

And Earth's evening came huge and hushed, till all was dim as the

twilight; and never a footfall did they hear of the unicorns, never a

glimpse of their whiteness. And yet the trolls had guided Orion well,

for just as he would have despaired of a hunt that night, just when the

evening seemed wholly and utterly empty, a unicorn stood on the

earthward edge of the twilight where nothing had stood only a moment

before: soon he moved slowly across the terrestrial grasses a few yards

forward into the fields of men.



Another followed, moving a few yards also; and then they stood for

fifteen of our earthly minutes moving nothing at all except their ears.

And all that while the trolls hushed every hound, motionless under a

hedge of the fields we know. Darkness had all but hidden them when at

last the unicorns moved. And, as soon as the largest was far enough from

the frontier, the trolls let loose every hound, and ran with them after

the unicorn with shrill yells of derision, all sure of his haughty head.



But the quick small minds of the trolls, though they had learned much of

Earth, had not yet understood the irregularity of the moon. Darkness was

new to them, and they soon lost hounds. Orion in his eagerness to hunt

had made no choice of a suitable night: there was no moon at all, and

would be none till near morning. Soon he also fell behind.



Orion easily collected the trolls, the night was full of their

frivolous noises, and the trolls came to his horn, but not a hound would

leave that pungent magical scent for any horn of man. They straggled

back next day, tired, having lost their unicorn.



And while each troll cleaned and fed his hound on the evening after the

hunt, and laid a little bunch of straw for it on which to lie down, and

smoothed its hair and looked for thorns in its feet, and unravelled

burrs from its ears, Lurulu sat alone fastening his small sharp

intelligence, like the little white light of a burning glass, for hours

upon one question. The question that Lurulu pondered far into the night

was how to hunt unicorns with dogs in the darkness. And by midnight a

plan was clear in his elvish mind.









                             CHAPTER XXIX



               _The Luring of the People of the Marshes_





As the evening that followed was beginning to fade a traveller might

have been seen approaching the marshes, which some way south-eastwards

of Erl lay along the edge of the farmsteads and stretched their terrible

waste as far as the sky-line, and even over the border and into the

region of Elfland. They glimmered now as the light was leaving the land.



So black were the solemn clothes and the high grave hat of the traveller

that he could have been seen from far against the dim green of the

fields, going down to the edge of the marsh through the grey evening.

But none were there to see at such an hour beside that desolate place,

for the threat of darkness was already felt in the fields, and all the

cows were home and the farmers warm in their houses; so the traveller

walked alone. And soon he was come by unsure paths to the reeds and the

thin rushes, to which a wind was telling tales that have no meaning to

man, long histories of bleakness and ancient legends of rain; while on

the high darkening land far off behind him he saw lights begin to blink

where the houses were. He walked with the gravity and the solemn air of

one who has important business with men; yet his back was turned to

their houses and he went where no man wandered, travelling towards no

hamlet or lonely cottage of man, for the marsh ran right into Elfland.

Between him and the nebulous border that divides Earth from Elfland

there was no man whatever, and yet the traveller walked on as one that

has a grave errand. With every venerable step that he took bright mosses

shook and the marsh seemed about to engulf him, while his worthy staff

sank deep into slime, giving him no support; and yet the traveller

seemed only to care for the solemnity of his pacing. Thus he went on

over the deadly marsh with a deportment suitable to the slow procession

when the elders open the market on special days, and the gravest blesses

the bargaining, and all the farmers come to the booths and barter.



And up and down, up and down, song-birds went wavering home, skirting

the marsh's edge on their way to their native hedges; pigeons passed

landward to roost in high dark trees; the last of a multitude of rooks

was gone; and all the air was empty.



And now the great marsh thrilled to the news of the coming of a

stranger; for, no sooner had the traveller gravely set a foot on one of

those brilliant mosses that bloom in the pools, than a thrill shot under

their roots and below the stems of the bulrushes, and ran like a light

beneath the surface of the water, or like the sound of a song, and

passed far over the marshes, and came quivering to the border of magical

twilight that divides Elfland from Earth; and stayed not there, but

troubled the very border and passed beyond it and was felt in Elfland:

for where the great marshes run down to the border of Earth the

frontier is thinner and more uncertain than elsewhere.



And as soon as they felt that thrill in the deep of the marshes the

will-o'-the-wisps soared up from their fathomless homes, and waved their

lights to beckon the traveller on, over the quaking mosses at the hour

when the duck were flighting. And under that whirr and rush and

rejoicing of wings that the ducks make in that hour the traveller

followed after the waving lights, further and further into the marshes.

Yet sometimes he turned from them, so that for a while they followed

him, instead of leading as they were accustomed to do, till they could

get round in front of him and lead him once more. A watcher, if there

had been one in such bad light and in such a perilous place, had noticed

after a while in the venerable traveller's movements a queer resemblance

to those of the hen green plover when she lures the stranger after her

in Spring, away from the mossy bank where her eggs lie bare. Or perhaps

such a resemblance is merely fanciful, and a watcher might have noticed

no such thing. At any rate on that night in that desolate place there

was no watcher whatever.



And the traveller followed his curious course, sometimes towards the

dangerous mosses, sometimes towards the safe green land, always with

grave demeanour and reverent gait; and the will-o'-the-wisps in

multitudes gathered about him. And still that deep thrill that warned

the marsh of a stranger throbbed on through the ooze below the roots of

the rushes; and did not cease, as it should as soon as the stranger was

dead, but haunted the marsh like some echo of music that magic has made

everlasting, and troubled the will-o'-the-wisps even over the border in

Elfland.



Now it is far from my intention to write anything detrimental to

will-o'-the-wisps, or anything that may be construed as being a slight

upon them: no such construction should be put upon my writings. But it

is well known that the people of the marshes lure travellers to their

doom, and have delighted to follow that avocation for centuries, and I

may be permitted to mention this in no spirit of disapproval.



The will-o'-the-wisps then that were about this traveller redoubled

their efforts with fury; and when still he eluded their last enticements

only on the very edge of the deadliest pools, and still lived and still

travelled, and the whole marsh knew of it, then the greater

will-o'-the-wisps that dwell in Elfland rose up from their magical mire

and rushed over the border. And the whole marsh was troubled.



Almost like little moons grown nimbly impudent the people of the marshes

glowed before that solemn traveller, leading his reverend steps to the

edge of death only to retrace their steps again to beckon him back once

more. And then in spite of the great height of his hat and the dark

length of his coat that frivolous people began to perceive that mosses

were bearing his weight which never before had supported any traveller.

At this their fury increased and they all leaped nearer to him; and

nearer and nearer they flocked wherever he went; and in their fury their

enticements were losing their craftiness.



And now a watcher in the marshes, if such there had been, had seen

something more than a traveller surrounded by will-o'-the-wisps; for he

might have noticed that the traveller was almost leading them, instead

of the will-o'-the-wisps leading the traveller. And in their impatience

to have him dead the people of the marshes had never thought that they

were all coming nearer and nearer to the dry land.



And when all was dark but the water they suddenly found themselves in a

field of grass with their feet rasping against the rough pasture, while

the traveller was seated with his knees gathered up to his chin and was

eyeing them from under the brim of his high black hat. Never before had

any of them been lured to dry land by traveller, and there were amongst

them that night those eldest and greatest among them who had come with

their moon-like lights right over the border from Elfland. They looked

at each other in uneasy astonishment as they dropped limply onto the

grass, for the roughness and heaviness of the solid land oppressed them

after the marshes. And then they began to perceive that that venerable

traveller whose bright eyes watched them so keenly out of that black

mass of clothes was little larger than they were themselves, in spite of

his reverend airs. Indeed, though stouter and rounder he was not quite

so tall. Who was this, they began to mutter, who had lured

will-o'-the-wisps? And some of those elders from Elfland went up to him

that they might ask him with what audacity he had dared to lure such as

them. And then the traveller spoke. Without rising or turning his head

he spoke where he sat.



"People of the marshes," he said, "do you love unicorns?"



And at the word unicorns scorn and laughter filled every tiny heart in

all that frivolous multitude, excluding all other emotions, so that they

forgot their petulance at having been lured; although to lure

will-o'-the-wisps is held by them to be the gravest of insults, and

never would they have forgiven it if they had had longer memories. At

the word unicorns they all giggled in silence. And this they did by

flickering up and down like the light of a little mirror flashed by an

impudent hand. Unicorns! Little love had they for the haughty creatures.

Let them learn to speak to the people of the marshes when they came to

drink at their pools. Let them learn to give their due to the great

lights of Elfland, and the lesser lights that illumined the marshes of

Earth!



"No," said an elder of the will-o'-the-wisps, "none loves the proud

unicorns."



"Come then," said the traveller, "and we will hunt them. And you shall

light us in the night with your lights, when we hunt them with dogs over

the fields of men."



"Venerable traveller," said that elder will-o'-the-wisp: but at those

words the traveller flung up his hat and leaped from his long black

coat, and stood before the will-o'-the-wisps stark naked. And the people

of the marshes saw that it was a troll that had tricked them.



Their anger at this was slight; for the people of the marshes have

tricked the trolls, and the trolls have tricked the people of the

marshes, each of them so many times for ages and ages, that only the

wisest among them can say which has tricked the other most and is how

many tricks ahead. They consoled themselves now by thinking of times

when trolls had been made to look ludicrous, and consented to come with

their lights to help to hunt unicorns, for their wills were weak when

they stood on the dry land and they easily acquiesced in any suggestion

or followed anyone's whim.



It was Lurulu who had thus tricked the will-o'-the-wisps, knowing well

how they love to lure travellers; and, having obtained the highest hat

and gravest coat he could steal, he had set out with a bait that he

knew would bring them from great distances. Now that he had gathered

them all on the solid land and had their promise of light and help

against unicorns, which such creatures will give easily on account of

the unicorns' pride, he began to lead them away to the village of Erl,

slowly at first while their feet grew accustomed to the hard land; and

over the fields he brought them limping to Erl.



And now there was nothing in all the marshes that at all resembled man,

and the geese came down on a huge tumult of wings. The little swift teal

shot home; and all the dark air twanged with the flight of the duck.









                              CHAPTER XXX



                    _The Coming of Too Much Magic_





In Erl that had sighed for magic there was indeed magic now. The

pigeon-loft and old lumber-lofts over stables were all full of trolls,

the ways were full of their antics, and lights bobbed up and down the

street at night long after traffic was home. For the will-o'-the-wisps

would go dancing along the gutters, and had made their homes round the

soft edges of duck-ponds and in green-black patches of moss that grew

upon oldest thatch. And nothing seemed the same in the old village.



And amongst all these magical folk the magical half of Orion's blood,

that had slept while he went amongst earthly men, hearing mundane talk

each day, stirred out of its sleep and awakened long-sleeping thoughts

in his brain. And the elfin horns that he often heard blowing at evening

blew with a meaning now, and blew stronger as though they were nearer.



The folk of the village watching their lord by day saw his eyes turned

away towards Elfland, saw him neglecting the wholesome earthly cares,

and at night there came the queer lights and the gibbering of the

trolls. A fear settled on Erl.



At this time the parliament took counsel again, twelve grey-beard

quaking men that had come to the house of Narl when their work was ended

at evening; and all the evening was weird with the new magic of Elfland.

Every man of them as he ran from his own warm house on his way to the

forge of Narl had seen lights leaping, or heard voices gibbering, which

were of no Christom land. And some had seen shapes prowling which were

of no earthly growing, and they feared that all manner of things had

slipped through the border of Elfland to come and visit the trolls.



They spoke low in their parliament: all told the same tale, a tale of

children terrified, a tale of women demanding the old ways again; and as

they spoke they eyed window and crevice, none knowing what might come.



And Oth said: "Let us folk go to the Lord Orion as we went to his

grandfather in his long red room. Let us say how we sought for magic,

and lo we have magic enough; and let him follow no more after witchery

nor the things that are hidden from man."



He listened acutely, standing there amongst his hushed comrade

neighbours. Was it goblin voices that mocked him, or was it only echo?

Who could say? And almost at once the night all round was hushed again.



And Threl said: "Nay. It is too late for that." Threl had seen their

lord one evening standing alone on the downs, all motionless and

listening to something sounding from Elfland, with his eyes to the East

as he listened: and nothing was sounding, not a noise was astir; yet

Orion stood there called by things beyond mortal hearing. "It is too

late now," said Threl.



And that was the fear of all.



Then Guhic rose slowly up and stood by that table. And trolls were

gibbering like bats away in their loft, and the pale marsh-lights were

flickering, and shapes prowled in the dark: the pit-pat of their feet

came now and then to the ears of the twelve that were there in that

inner room. And Guhic said: "We wished for a little magic." And a gust

of gibbering came clear from the trolls. And then they disputed awhile

as to how much magic they had wished in the olden time, when the

grandfather of Orion was lord in Erl. But when they came to a plan this

was the plan of Guhic.



"If we may not turn our lord Orion," he said, "and his eyes be turned to

Elfland, let all our parliament go up the hill to the witch Ziroonderel,

and put our case to her, and ask for a spell which shall be put against

too much magic."



And at the name of Ziroonderel the twelve took heart again; for they

knew that her magic was greater than the magic of flickering lights, and

knew there was not a troll or thing of the night but went in fear of her

broom. They took heart again and quaffed Narl's heavy mead, and

re-filled their mugs and praised Guhic.



And late in the night they all rose up together to go back to their

homes, and all kept close together as they went, and sang grave old

songs to affright the things that they feared; though little the light

trolls care, or the will-o'-the-wisps, for the things that are grave to

man. And when only one was left he ran to his house, and the

will-o'-the-wisps chased him.



When the next day came they ended their work early, for the parliament

of Erl cared not to be left on the witch's hill when night came, or even

the gloaming. They met outside Narl's forge in the early afternoon,

eleven of the parliament, and they called out Narl. And all were wearing

the clothes they were wont to wear when they went with the rest to the

holy place of the Freer, though there was scarcely a soul he had ever

cursed that was not blessed by her. And away they went with their old

stout staves up the hill.



And as soon as they could they came to the witch's house. And there they

found her sitting outside her door gazing over the valley away, and

looking neither older nor younger, nor concerned one way or the other

with the coming and going of years.



"We be the parliament of Erl," they said, standing before her all in

their graver clothes.



"Aye," she said. "You desired magic. Has it come to you yet?"



"Truly," they said, "and to spare."



"There is more to come," she said.



"Mother Witch," said Narl, "we are met here to pray you that you will

give us a goodly spell which shall be a charm against magic, so that

there be no more of it in the valley, for overmuch has come."



"Overmuch?" she said. "Overmuch magic! As though magic were not the

spice and essence of life, its ornament and its splendour. By my broom,"

said she, "I give you no spell against magic."



And they thought of the wandering lights and the scarce-seen gibbering

things, and all the strangeness and evil that was come to their valley

of Erl, and they besought her again, speaking suavely to her.



"Oh, Mother Witch," said Guhic, "there is overmuch magic indeed, and the

folk that should tarry in Elfland are all over the border."



"It is even so," said Narl. "The border is broken and there will be no

end to it. Will-o'-the-wisps should stay in the marshes, and trolls and

goblins in Elfland, and we folk should keep to our own folk. This is the

thought of us all. For magic, if we desired it somewhat, years ago when

we were young, pertains to matters that are not for man."



She eyed him silently with a cat-like glow increasing in her eyes. And

when she neither spoke nor moved, Narl besought her again.



"O Mother Witch," he said, "will you give us no spell to guard our homes

against magic?"



"No spell indeed!" she hissed. "No spell indeed! By broom and stars and

night-riding! Would you rob Earth of her heirloom that has come from the

olden time? Would you take her treasure and leave her bare to the scorn

of her comrade planets? Poor indeed were we without magic, whereof we

are well stored to the envy of darkness and Space." She leaned forward

from where she sat and stamped her stick, looking up in Narl's face with

her fierce unwavering eyes. "I would sooner," she said, "give you a

spell against water, that all the world should thirst, than give you a

spell against the song of streams that evening hears faintly over the

ridge of a hill, too dim for wakeful ears, a song threading through

dreams, whereby we learn of old wars and lost loves of the Spirits of

rivers. I would sooner give you a spell against bread, that all the

world should starve, than give you a spell against the magic of wheat

that haunts the golden hollows in moonlight in July, through which in

the warm short nights wander how many of whom man knows nothing. I would

make you spells against comfort and clothing, food, shelter and warmth,

aye and will do it, sooner than tear from these poor fields of Earth

that magic that is to them an ample cloak against the chill of Space,

and a gay raiment against the sneers of nothingness.



"Go hence. To your village go. And you that sought for magic in your

youth but desire it not in your age, know that there is a blindness of

spirit which comes from age, more black than the blindness of eye,

making a darkness about you across which nothing may be seen, or felt,

or known, or in any way apprehended. And no voice out of that darkness

shall conjure me to grant a spell against magic. Hence!"



And as she said "Hence" she put her weight on her stick and was

evidently preparing to rise from her seat. And at this great terror came

upon all the parliament. And they noticed at the same moment that

evening was drawing in and all the valley darkening. On this high field

where the witch's cabbages grew some light yet lingered, and listening

to her fierce words they had not thought of the hour. But now it was

manifestly growing late, and a wind roamed past them that seemed to come

over the ridges a little way off, from night; and chilled them as it

passed; and all the air seemed given over to that very thing against

which they sought for a spell.



And here they were at this hour with the witch before them, and she was

evidently about to rise. Her eyes were fixed on them. Already she was

partly up from her chair. There could be no doubt that before three

moments were passed she would be hobbling amongst them with her

glittering eyes peering in each one's face. They turned and ran down the

hill.









                             CHAPTER XXXI



                     _The Cursing of Elfin Things_





As the parliament of Erl ran down the hill they ran into the dusk of

evening. Greyly it lay in the valley above the mist from the stream. But

with more than the mystery of dusk the air was heavy. Lights blinking

early from houses showed that all the folk were home, and the street was

deserted by everything that was human; save when with hushed air and

almost furtive step they saw their lord Orion like a tall shadow go by,

with will-o'-the-wisps behind him, towards the house of the trolls,

thinking no earthly thoughts. And the strangeness that had been growing

day by day made all the village eerie. So that with short and troubled

breath the twelve old men hurried on.



And so they came to the holy place of the Freer, which lay on the side

of the village that was towards the witch's hill. And it was the hour at

which he was wont to celebrate after-bird-song, as they named the

singing that they sang in the holy place when all the birds were home.

But the Freer was not within his holy place; he stood in the cold night

air on the upper step without it, his face turned towards Elfland. He

had on his sacred robe with its border of purple, and the emblem of

gold round his neck; but the door of his holy place was shut and his

back was towards it. They wondered to see him stand thus.



And as they wondered the Freer began to intone, clear in the evening

with his eyes away to the East, where already a few of the earliest

stars were showing. With his head held high he spoke as though his voice

might pass over the frontier of twilight and be heard by the people of

Elfland.



"Curst be all wandering things," he said, "whose place is not upon

Earth. Curst be all lights that dwell in fens and in marish places.

Their homes are in deeps of the marshes. Let them by no means stir from

there until the Last Day. Let them abide in their place and there await

damnation.



"Cursed be gnomes, trolls, elves and goblins on land, and all sprites of

the water. And fauns be accursed and such as follow Pan. And all that

dwell on the heath, being other than beasts or men. Cursed be fairies

and all tales told of them, and whatever enchants the meadows before the

sun is up, and all fables of doubtful authority, and the legends that

men hand down from unhallowed times.



"Cursed be brooms that leave their place by the hearth. Cursed be

witches and all manner of witcheries.



"Cursed be toadstool rings and whatever dances within them. And all

strange lights, strange songs, strange shadows, or rumours that hint of

them, and all doubtful things of the dusk, and the things that

ill-instructed children fear, and old wives' tales and things done o'

midsummer nights; all these be accursed with all that leaneth toward

Elfland and all that cometh thence."



Never a lane of that village, never a barn, but a will-o'-the-wisp was

dancing nimbly above it; the night was gilded with them. But as the good

Freer spoke they backed away from his curses, floating further off as

though a light wind blew them, and danced again after drifting a little

way. This they did both before and behind him and upon either hand, as

he stood there upon the steps of his holy place. So that there was a

circle of darkness all round him, and beyond that circle shone the

lights of the marshes and Elfland.



And within the dark circle in which the Freer stood making his curses

were no unhallowed things, nor were there strangenesses such as come of

night, nor whispers from unknown voices, nor sounds of any music blowing

here from no haunts of men; but all was orderly and seemly there and no

mysteries troubled the quiet except such as have been justly allowed to

man.



And beyond that circle whence so much was beaten back by the bright

vehemence of the good man's curses, the will-o'-the-wisps rioted, and

many a strangeness that poured in that night from Elfland, and goblins

held high holiday. For word was gone forth in Elfland that pleasant folk

had now their dwelling in Erl; and many a thing of fable, many a monster

of myth, had crept through that border of twilight and had come into Erl

to see. And the light and false but friendly will-o'-the-wisps danced in

the haunted air and made them welcome.



And not only the trolls and the will-o'-the-wisps had lured these folk

from their fabled land through the seldom-traversed border, but the

longings and thoughts of Orion, which by half his lineage were akin to

the things of myth and of one race with the monsters of Elfland, were

calling to them now. Ever since that day by the frontier when he had

hovered between Earth and Elfland he had yearned more and more for his

mother; and now, whether he willed it or no, his elfin thoughts were

calling their kin that dwelt in the elvish fells; and at that hour when

the sound of the horns blew through the frontier of twilight they had

come tumbling after it. For elfin thoughts are as much akin to the

creatures that dwell in Elfland as goblins are to trolls.



Within the calm and the dark of the good man's curses the twelve old men

stood silent listening to every word. And the words seemed good to them

and soothing and right, for they were over-weary of magic.



But beyond the circle of darkness, amidst the glare of the

will-o'-the-wisps with which all the night flickered, amidst goblin

laughter and the unbridled mirth of the trolls, where old legends seemed

alive and the fearfullest fables true; amongst all manner of mysteries,

queer sounds, queer shapes, and queer shadows; Orion passed with his

hounds, eastwards towards Elfland.









                             CHAPTER XXXII



                      _Lirazel Yearns for Earth_





In the hall that was built of moonlight, dreams, music and mirage

Lirazel knelt on the sparkling floor before her father's throne. And the

light of the magical throne shone blue in her eyes, and her eyes flashed

back a light that deepened its magic. And kneeling there she besought a

rune of her father.



Old days would not let her be, sweet memories thronged about her: the

lawns of Elfland had her love, lawns upon which she had played by the

old miraculous flowers before any histories were written here; she loved

the sweet soft creatures of myth that moved like magical shadows out of

the guardian wood and over enchanted grasses; she loved every fable and

song and spell that had made her elfin home; and yet the bells of Earth,

that could not pass the frontier of silence and twilight, beat note by

note in her brain, and her heart felt the growth of the little earthly

flowers as they bloomed or faded or slept in seasons that came not to

Elfland. And in those seasons, wasting away as every one went by, she

knew that Alveric wandered, knew that Orion lived and grew and changed,

and that both, if Earth's legend were true, would soon be lost to her

forever and ever, when the gates of Heaven would shut on both with a

golden thud. For between Elfland and Heaven is no path, no flight, no

way; and neither sends ambassador to the other. She yearned to the bells

of Earth and the English cowslips, but would not forsake again her

mighty father nor the world that his mind had made. And Alveric came

not, nor her boy Orion; only the sound of Alveric's horn came once, and

often strange longings seemed to float in air, beating vainly back and

forth between Orion and her. And the gleaming pillars that held the dome

of the roof, or above which it floated, quivered a little with her

grief; and shadows of her sorrow flickered and faded in the crystal deep

of the walls, for a moment dimming many a colour that is unknown in our

fields, but making them no less lovely. What could she do who would not

cast away magic and leave the home that an ageless day had endeared to

her while centuries were withering like leaves upon earthly shores,

whose heart was yet held by those little tendrils of Earth, which are

strong enough, strong enough?



And some, translating her bitter need into pitiless earthly words, may

say that she wished to be in two places at once. And that was true, and

the impossible wish lies on the verge of laughter, and for her was only

and wholly a matter for tears. Impossible? Was it impossible? We have to

do with magic.



She besought a rune of her father, kneeling upon the magic floor in the

midmost centre of Elfland; and around her arose the pillars, of which

only song may say, whose misty bulk was disturbed and troubled by

Lirazel's sorrow. She besought a rune that, wherever they roamed through

whatever fields of Earth, should restore to her Alveric and Orion,

bringing them over the border and into the elfin lands to live in that

timeless age that is one long day in Elfland. And with them she prayed

might come, (for the mighty runes of her father had such power even as

this) some garden of Earth, or bank where violets lay, or hollow where

cowslips waved, to shine in Elfland for ever.



Like no music heard in any cities of men or dreamed upon earthly hills,

with his elfin voice her father answered her. And the ringing words were

such as had power to change the shape of the hills of dreams, or to

enchant new flowers to blow in fields of faery. "I have no rune," he

said, "that has power to pass the frontier, or to lure anything from the

mundane fields, be it violets, cowslips or men, to come through our

bulwark of twilight that I have set to guard us against material things.

No rune but one, and that the last of the potencies of our realm."



And kneeling yet upon the glittering floor, of whose profound

translucence song alone shall speak, she prayed him for that one rune,

last potency though it be of the awful wonders of Elfland.



And he would not squander that rune that lay locked in his treasury,

most magical of his powers and last of the three, but held it against

the peril of a distant and unknown day, whose light shone just beyond a

curve of the ages, too far for the eerie vision even of his

foreknowledge.



She knew that he had moved Elfland far afield and swung it back as tides

are swung by the moon, till it lapped at the very edge of the fields of

men once more, with its glimmering border touching the tips of the

earthly hedges. And she knew that no more than the moon had he used a

rare wonder, merely wafting his regions away by a magical gesture.

Might he not, she thought, bring Elfland and Earth yet nearer, using no

rarer magic than is used by the moon at the neap? And so she supplicated

him once again, recalling wonders to him that he had wrought and yet

used no rarer spell than a certain wave of his arm. She spoke of the

magical orchids that came down once over cliffs like a sudden roseate

foam breaking over the Elfin Mountains. She spoke of the downy clusters

of queer mauve flowers which bloomed in the grass of the dells, and of

that glory of blossom that forever guarded the lawns. For all these

wonders were his: bird-song and blooming of flower alike were his

inspirations. If such wonders as song and bloom were wrought by a wave

of his hand, surely he might by beckoning bring but a short way from

Earth some few fields that lay so near to the earthly border. Or surely

he might move Elfland a little earthward again, who had lately moved it

as far as the turn in the path of the comet, and had brought it again to

the edge of the fields of men.



"Never," he said, "can any rune but one, or spell or wonder or any

magical thing, move our realm one wing's width over the earthly border

or bring anything thence here. And little they know in those fields that

even one rune can do it."



And still she would scarce believe that those accustomed powers of her

wizard sire could not easily bring the things of Earth and the wonders

of Elfland together.



"From those fields," he said, "my spells are all beaten back, my

incantations are mute, and my right arm powerless."



And when he spoke thus to her of that dread right arm, at last perforce

she believed him. And she prayed him again for that ultimate rune, that

long-hoarded treasure of Elfland, that potency that had strength to

work against the harsh weight of Earth.



And his thoughts went into the future all alone, peering far down the

years. More gladly had a traveller at night in lonely ways given up his

lantern than had this elvish king now used his last great spell, and so

cast it away, and gone without it into those dubious years; whose dim

forms he saw and many of their events, but not to the end. Easily had

she asked for that dread spell, which should appease the only need she

had, easily might he have granted it were he but human; but his vast

wisdom saw so much of the years to be that he feared to face them

without this last great potency.



"Beyond our border," he said, "material things stand fierce and strong

and many, and have the power to darken and to increase, for they have

wonders too. And when this last potency be used and gone there remains

in all our realm no rune that they dread; and material things will

multiply and put the powers in bondage, and we without any rune of which

they go in awe shall become no more than a fable. We must yet store this

rune."



Thus he reasoned with her rather than commanded, though he was the

founder and King of all those lands, and all that wandered in them and

of the light in which they shone. And reason in Elfland was no daily

thing, but an exotic wonder. With this he sought to soothe her earthward

fancies.



And Lirazel made no answer but only wept, weeping tears of enchanted

dew. And all the line of the Elfin Mountains quivered, as wandering

winds will tremble to notes of a violin that have strayed beyond hearing

down the ways of the air; and all the creatures of fable that dwelt in

the realm of Elfland felt something strange in their hearts like the

dying away of a song.



"Is it not best for Elfland that I do this?" said the King.



And still she only wept.



And then he sighed and considered the welfare of Elfland again. For

Elfland drew its happiness from the calm of that palace, which was its

centre, and of which only song may tell; and now its spires were

troubled and the light of its walls was dim, and a sorrow was floating

from its vaulted doorway all over the fields of faery and over the dells

of dream. If she were happy Elfland might bask again in that untroubled

light and eternal calm whose radiance blesses all but material things;

and though his treasury were open and empty yet what more were needed

then?



So he commanded, and a coffer was brought before him by elfin things,

and the knight of his guard who had watched over it forever came

marching behind them.



He opened the coffer with a spell, for it opened to no key, and taking

from it an ancient parchment scroll he rose and read from it while his

daughter wept. And the words of the rune as he read were like the notes

of a band of violins, all played by masters chosen from many ages,

hidden on midsummer's midnight in a wood, with a strange moon shining,

the air all full of madness and mystery; and, lurking close but

invisible, things beyond the wisdom of man.



Thus he read that rune, and powers heard and obeyed it, not alone in

Elfland but over the border of Earth.









                            CHAPTER XXXIII



                          _The Shining Line_





Alveric wandered on, alone of that small company of three without a hope

to guide him. For Niv and Zend, who were lately led by the hope of their

fantastic quest, no longer yearned for Elfland but were guided now by

their plan to hold Alveric back from it. They vacillated more slowly

than sane folk, but clung with far more than sane fervour to each

vacillation. And Zend that had wandered through so many years with the

hope of Elfland before him looked on it, now that he had seen its

frontier, as one of the rivals of the moon. Niv who had endured as much

for Alveric's quest saw in that magical land something more fabulous

than was in all his dreams. And now when Alveric attempted lame

cajoleries with those swift and ferocious minds he received no more

answers from Zend than the curt statement "It is not the will of the

moon": while Niv would only reiterate "Have I not dreams enough?"



They were wandering back again past farms that had known them years

before. With their old grey tent more tattered they appeared in the

twilight, adding a shade to the evening, in fields wherein they and

their tent had become a legend. And never was Alveric unwatched by some

mad eye, lest he should slip from the camp and come to Elfland and be

where dreams were stranger than Niv's and under a power more magical

than the moon.



Often he tried, creeping silently from his place in the dead of night.

One moonlight night he tried first, waiting awake till all the world

seemed sleeping. He knew that the frontier was not far away as he crept

from the tent into the brightness and black shadows and passed Niv

sleeping heavily. A little way he went, and there was Zend sitting still

on a rock, gazing into the face of the moon. Round came Zend's face and,

newly inspired by the moon, he shouted and leapt at Alveric. They had

taken away his sword. And Niv woke and came towards them with immense

fury, united to Zend by one jealousy; for each of them knew well that

the wonders of Elfland were greater than any fancy that their minds

would ever know.



And again he tried, on a night when no moon shone. But on that night Niv

was sitting outside the camp, relishing in a strange and joyless way a

certain comradeship that there was between his ravings and the

interstellar darkness. And there in the night he saw Alveric slipping

away towards the land whose wonders far transcended all Niv's poor

dreams; and all the fury the lesser can feel for the greater awoke at

once in his mind; and, creeping up behind him, without any help from

Zend he smote Alveric insensible to the ground.



And never did Alveric plan any escape after that but that the busy

thoughts of madness anticipated it.



And so they came, watchers and watched, over the fields of men. And

Alveric sought help of the folk of the farms; but the cunning of Niv

knew too well the tricks of sanity. So that when the folk came running

over their fields to that queer grey tent from which they heard

Alveric's cries, they found Niv and Zend posed in a calm that they had

much practised, while Alveric told of his thwarted quest of Elfland. Now

by many men all quests are considered mad, as the cunning of Niv knew.

Alveric found no help here.



As they went back by the way by which they had marched for years Niv led

that band of three, stepping ahead of Alveric and Zend with his lean

face held high, made all the leaner by the long thin points to which he

had trained his beard and his moustaches, and wearing Alveric's sword

that stuck out long behind him and its hilt high in front. And he

stepped and perked his head with a certain air that revealed to the rare

travellers who saw him that this sparse and ragged figure esteemed

itself the leader of a greater band than were visible. Indeed if one had

just seen him at the end of the evening with the dusk and the mist of

the fenlands close behind him he might have believed that in the dusk

and the mist was an army that followed this gay worn confident man. Had

the army been there Niv was sane. Had the world accepted that an army

was there, even though only Alveric and Zend followed his curious steps,

still he was sane. But the lonely fancy that had not fact to feed on,

nor the fancy of any other for fellowship, was for its loneliness mad.



Zend watched Alveric all the while, as they marched behind Niv; for

their mutual jealousy of the wonders of Elfland bound Niv and Zend

together to work as with one wild whim.



And now one morning Niv stretched himself up to the fullest possible

height of his lean inches and extended his right arm high and addressed

his army, "We are come near again to Erl," he said. "And we shall bring

new fancies in place of outworn things and things that are stale; and

its customs shall be henceforth the way of the moon."



Now Niv cared nothing for the moon, but he had great cunning, and he

knew that Zend would aid his new plan against Erl if only for the sake

of the moon. And Zend cheered till the echoes came back from a lonely

hill, and Niv smiled to them like a leader confident of his hosts. And

Alveric rose against them then, and struggled with Niv and Zend for the

last time, and learned that age or wandering or loss of hope had left

him unable to strive against the maniacal strength of these two. And

after that he went with them more meekly, with resignation, caring no

longer what befell him, living only in memory and only for days that had

been; and in November evenings in this dim camp in the chill he saw,

looking only backwards through the years, Spring mornings shine again on

the towers of Erl. In the light of these mornings he saw Orion again,

playing again with old toys that the witch had made with a spell; he saw

Lirazel move once more through the gracious gardens. Yet no light that

memory is able to kindle was strong enough to illumine much that camp in

those sombre evenings, when the damp rose up from the ground and the

chill swooped out of the air, and Niv and Zend as darkness came stealing

nearer began to chatter in low eager voices schemes inspired by such

whims as throve at dusk in the waste. Only when the sad day drifted

wholly thence and Alveric slept by flapping tatters that streamed from

the tent in the night, then only was memory, unhindered by the busy

changes of day, able to bring back Erl to him, bright, happy and vernal;

so that while his body lay still, in far fields, in the dark and the

Winter, all that was most active and live in him was back over the wolds

in Erl, back over the years in Spring with Lirazel and Orion.



How far he was bodily, in sheer miles from his home, for which his happy

thoughts each night forsook his weary frame, Alveric knew not. It was

many years since their tent had stood one evening a grey shape in that

landscape in which it now waved its tatters. But Niv knew that of late

they had come nearer to Erl, for his dreams of it came to him now soon

after he fell asleep, and they used to come to him further on in the

night, on the other side of midnight and even towards morning: and from

this he argued that they used to have further to come, and were now but

a little way off. When he told this secretly one evening to Zend, Zend

listened gravely but gave no opinion, merely saying "The moon knows."

Nevertheless he followed Niv, who led this curious caravan always in

that direction from which his dreams of the valley of Erl came soonest.

And this queer leadership brought them nearer to Erl, as often happens

where men follow leaders that are crazy or blind or deceived; they reach

some port or other though they stray down the years with little

foresight enough: were it otherwise what would become of us?



And one day the upper parts of the towers of Erl looked at them out of

blue distance, shining in early sunlight above a curve of the downs. And

towards them Niv turned at once and led directly, for the line of their

wandering march had not pointed straight to Erl, and marched on as a

conqueror that sees some new city's gates. What his plans were Alveric

did not know, but kept to his apathy; and Zend did not know, for Niv had

merely said that his plans must be secret; nor did Niv know, for his

fancies poured through his brain and rushed away; what fancies made what

plans in a mood that was yesterday's how could he tell to-day?



Then as they went they soon came to a shepherd, standing amongst his

grazing sheep and leaning upon his crook, who watched and seemed to have

no other care but only to watch all things going by, or, when nothing

passed, to gaze and gaze at the downs till all his memories were

fashioned out of their huge grass curves. He stood, a bearded man, and

watched them with never a word as they passed. And one of Niv's mad

memories suddenly knew him, and Niv hailed him by his name and the

shepherd answered. And who should he be but Vand!



Then they fell talking; and Niv spoke suavely, as he always did with

sane folk, aping with clever mimicry the ways and the tricks of sanity,

lest Alveric should ask for help against him. But Alveric sought no

help. Silent he stood and heard the others talking, but his thoughts

were far in the past and their voices were only sounds to him. And Vand

enquired of them if they had found Elfland. But he spoke as one asks of

children if their toy boat has been to the Happy Isles. He had had for

many years to do with sheep, and had come to know their needs and their

price, and the need men have of them; and these things had risen

imperceptibly up all round his imagination, and were at last a wall over

which he saw no further. When he was young, yes once, he had sought for

Elfland; but now, why now he was older; such things were for the young.



"But we saw its border," said Zend, "the border of twilight."



"A mist," said Vand, "of the evening."



"I have stood," said Zend, "upon the edge of Elfland."



But Vand smiled and shook his bearded head as he leaned on his long

crook, and every wave of his beard as he shook it slowly denied Zend's

tales of that border, and his lips smiled it away, and his tolerant eyes

were grave with the lore of the fields we know.



"No, not Elfland," he said.



And Niv agreed with Vand, for he watched his mood, studying the ways of

sanity. And they spoke of Elfland lightly, as one tells of some dream

that came at dawn and went away before waking. And Alveric heard with

despair, for Lirazel dwelt not only over the border but even, as he saw

now, beyond human belief; so that all at once she seemed remoter than

ever, and he still lonelier.



"I sought for it once," said Vand, "but no, there's no Elfland."



"No," said Niv, and only Zend wondered.



"No," replied Vand and shook his head and lifted his eyes to his sheep.



And just beyond his sheep and coming towards them he saw a shining line.

So long his eyes stayed fixed on that shining line coming over the downs

from the eastward that the others turned and looked.



They saw it too, a shimmering line of silver, or a little blue like

steel, flickering and changing with the reflection of strange passing

colours. And before it, very faint like threatening breezes breathing

before a storm, came the soft sound of very old songs. It caught, as

they all stood gazing, one of Vand's furthest sheep; and instantly its

fleece was that pure gold that is told of in old romance; and the

shining line came on and the sheep disappeared altogether. They saw now

that it was about the height of the mist from a small stream; and still

Vand stood gazing at it, neither moving nor thinking. But Niv turned

very soon and beckoned curtly to Zend and seized Alveric by the arm and

hastened away towards Erl. The gleaming line, that seemed to bump and

stumble over every unevenness of the rough fields, came not so fast as

they hastened; yet it never stopped when they rested, never wearied when

they were tired, but came on over all the hills and hedges of Earth; nor

did sunset change its appearance or check its pace.









                             CHAPTER XXXIV



                         _The Last Great Rune_





As Alveric hastened back, led by two madmen, to those lands over which

he had long ago been lord, the horns of Elfland had sounded in Erl all

day. And though only Orion heard them, they no less thrilled the air,

flooding it deep with their curious golden music, and filling the day

with a wonder that others felt; so that many a young girl leaned from

her window to see what was enchanting the morning. But as the day wore

on the enchantment of the unheard music dwindled, giving place to a

feeling that weighed on all minds in Erl and seemed to bode the

imminence of some unknown region of wonder. All his life Orion had heard

these horns blowing at evening except upon days on which he had done

ill: if he heard the horns at evening he knew that it was well with him.

But now they had blown in the morning, and blew all day, like a fanfare

in front of a march; and Orion looked out of his window and saw nothing,

and the horns rang on, proclaiming he knew not what. Far away they

called his thoughts from the things of Earth that are the concern of

men, far away from all that casts shadows. He spoke to no man that day,

but went among his trolls and such elfin things as had followed them

over the border. And all men that saw him perceived such a look in his

eyes as showed his thoughts to be far in realms that they dreaded. And

his thoughts were indeed far thence, once more with his mother. And hers

were with him, lavishing tendernesses that the years had denied her, in

their swift passage over our fields that she never had understood. And

somehow he knew she was nearer.



And all that strange morning the will-o'-the-wisps were restless and the

trolls leaped wildly all about their lofts, for the horns of Elfland

tinged all the air with magic and excited their blood although they

could not hear them. But towards evening they felt impending some great

change and all grew silent and moody. And something brought to them

yearnings for their far magical home, as though a breeze had blown

suddenly into their faces straight off the tarns of Elfland; and they

ran up and down the street looking for something magical, to ease their

loneliness amongst mundane things. But found nothing resembling the

spell-born lilies that grew in their glory above the elfin tarns. And

the folk of the village perceived them everywhere and longed for the

wholesome earthly days again that there were before the coming of magic

to Erl. And some of them hurried off to the house of the Freer and took

refuge with him amongst his holy things from all the unhallowed shapes

that there were in their streets and all the magic that tingled and

loomed in the air. And he guarded them with his curses which floated

away the light and almost aimless will-o'-the-wisps, and even, at a

short distance, awed the trolls, but they ran and capered only a little

way off. And while the little group clustered about the Freer, seeking

solace from him against whatever impended, with which the air was

growing tenser and grimmer as the short day wore on, there went others

to Narl and the busy elders of Erl to say "See what your plans have

done. See what you have brought on the village."



And none of the elders made immediate answer, but said that they must

take counsel one with another, for they trusted greatly in the words

said in their parliament. And to this intent they gathered again at the

forge of Narl. It was evening now, but the sun had not yet set nor Narl

gone from his work, but his fire was beginning to glow with a deeper

colour among the shadows that had entered his forge. And the elders came

in there walking slowly with grave faces, partly because of the mystery

that they needed to cover their folly from the sight of the villagers,

partly because magic hung now so gross in the air that they feared the

imminence of some portentous thing. They sat in their parliament in that

inner room, while the sun went low and the elfin horns, had they but

known it, blew clear and triumphantly. And there they sat in silence,

for what could they say? They had wished for magic, and now it had come.

Trolls were in all the streets, goblins had entered houses, and now the

nights were mad with will-o'-the-wisps; and all the air was heavy with

unknown magic. What could they say? And after a while Narl said they

must make a new plan; for they had been plain bell-fearing folk, but now

there were magical things all over Erl, and more came every night from

Elfland to join them, and what would become of the old ways unless they

made a plan?



And Narl's words emboldened them all, though they felt the ominous

menace of the horns that they could not hear; but the talk of a plan

emboldened them, for they deemed they could plan against magic. And one

by one they rose to speak of a plan.



But at sunset the talk died down. And their dread that something

impended grew now to a certain knowledge. Oth and Threl knew it first,

who had lived familiar with mystery in the woods. All knew that

something was coming. No one knew what. And they all sat silent

wondering in the gloaming.



Lurulu saw it first. He had dreamed all day of the weed-green tarns of

Elfland, and growing weary of Earth, had gone all lonely to the top of a

tower that rose from the Castle of Erl and perched himself on a

battlement and gazed wistfully homewards. And looking out over the

fields we know, he saw the shining line coming down on Erl. And from it

he heard rise faint, as it rippled over the furrows, a murmur of many

old songs; for it came with all manner of memories, old music and lost

voices, sweeping back again to our old fields what time had driven from

Earth. It was coming towards him bright as the Evening Star, and

flashing with sudden colours, some common on Earth, and some unknown to

our rainbow; so that Lurulu knew it at once for the frontier of Elfland.

And all his impudence returned to him at sight of his fabulous home, and

he uttered shrill gusts of laughter from his high perch, that rang over

the roofs below like the chatter of building birds. And the little

homesick trolls in the lofts were cheered by the sound of his merriment

though they knew not from what it came. And now Orion heard the horns

blowing so loud and near, and there was such triumph in their blowing,

and pomp, and withal so wistful a crooning, that he knew now why they

blew, knew that they proclaimed the approach of a princess of the elfin

line, knew that his mother came back to him.



High on her hill Ziroonderel knew this, being forwarned by magic; and

looking downward at evening she saw that star-like line of blended

twilights of old lost Summer evenings sweeping over the fields towards

Erl. Almost she wondered as she saw this glittering thing flowing over

the earthly pastures, although her wisdom had told her that it must

come. And on the one side she saw the fields we know, full of accustomed

things, and on the other, looking down from her height, she saw, behind

the myriad-tinted border, the deep green elfin foliage and Elfland's

magical flowers, and things that delirium sees not, nor inspiration, on

Earth; and the fabulous creatures of Elfland prancing forward; and,

stepping across our fields and bringing Elfland with her, the twilight

flowing from both her hands, which she stretched out a little from her,

was her own lady the Princess Lirazel coming back to her home. And at

this sight, and at all the strangeness coming across our fields, or

because of old memories that came with the twilight or bygone songs that

sang in it, a strange joy came shivering upon Ziroonderel, and if

witches weep she wept.



And now from upper windows of the houses the folk began to see that

glittering line which was no earthly twilight: they saw it flash at them

with its starry gleam and then flow on towards them. Slowly it came as

though it rippled with difficulty over Earth's rugged bulk, though

moving lately over the rightful lands of the Elf King it had outspeeded

the comet. And hardly had they wondered at its strangeness, when they

found themselves amongst most familiar things, for the old memories that

floated before it, as a wind before the thunder, beat in a sudden gust

on their hearts and their houses, and lo! they were living once more

amongst things long past and lost. And as that line of no earthly light

came nearer there rustled before it a sound as of rain on leaves, old

sighs, breathed over again, old lovers' whispers repeated. And there

fell on these folk as they all leaned hushed from their windows a mood

that looked gently, wistfully backward through time, such a mood as

might lurk by huge dock-leaves in ancient gardens when everyone is gone

that has tended their roses or ever loved the bowers.



Not yet had that line of starlight and bygone loves lapped at the walls

of Erl or foamed on the houses, but it was so near now that already

there slipped away the daily cares that held folk down to the present,

and they felt the balm of past days and blessings from hands long

withered. Now elders ran out to children that skipped with a rope in the

street, to bring them into the houses, not telling them why, for fear of

frightening their daughters. And the alarm in their mothers' faces for a

moment startled the children; then some of them looked to the eastward

and saw that shining line. "It is Elfland coming," they said, and went

on with their skipping.



And the hounds knew, though what they knew I cannot say; but some

influence reached them from Elfland such as comes from the full moon,

and they bayed as they bay on clear nights when the fields are flooded

with moonlight. And the dogs in the streets that always watched lest

anything strange should come, knew how great a strangeness was near them

now and proclaimed it to all the valley.



Already the old leather-worker in his cottage across the fields, looking

out of his window to see if his well were frozen, saw a May morning of

fifty years ago and his wife gathering lilac, for Elfland had beaten

Time away from his garden.



And now the jackdaws had left the towers of Erl and flew away westward;

and the baying of the hounds filled all the air, and the barking of

lesser dogs. This suddenly ceased and a great hush fell on the village,

as though snow had suddenly fallen inches deep. And through the hush

came softly a strange old music; and no one spoke at all.



Then where Ziroonderel sat by her door with her chin on her hand gazing,

she saw the bright line touch the houses and stop, flowing past them on

either side but held by the houses, as though it had met with something

too strong for its magic; but for only a moment the houses held back

that wonderful tide, for it broke over them with a burst of unearthly

foam, like a meteor of unknown metal burning in heaven, and passed on

and the houses stood all quaint and queer and enchanted, like homes

remembered out of a long-past age by the sudden waking of an inherited

memory.



And then she saw the boy she had nursed step forward into the twilight,

drawn by a power no less than that which was moving Elfland: she saw him

and his mother meet again in all that light that was flooding the valley

with splendour. And Alveric was with her, he and she together a little

apart from attendant fabulous things, that escorted her all the way from

the vales of the Elfin Mountains. And from Alveric had fallen away that

heavy burden of years, and all the sorrow of wandering: he too was back

again in the days that were, with old songs and lost voices. And

Ziroonderel could not see the princess's tears when she met Orion again

after all that separation of space and time, for, though they flashed

like stars, she stood in the border in all that radiance of starlight

that shone about her like the broad face of a planet. But though the

witch saw not this there came to her old ears clearly the sounds of

songs returning again to our fields out of the glens of Elfland, wherein

they had lain so long, which were all the old songs lost from the

nurseries of the Earth. They crooned now about the meeting of Lirazel

and Orion.



And Niv and Zend had ease at last from their fierce fancies, for their

wild thoughts sank to rest in the calm of Elfland and slept as hawks

sleep in their trees when evening has lulled the world. Ziroonderel saw

them standing together where the edge of the downs had been, a little

way off from Alveric. And there was Vand amongst his golden sheep, that

were munching the strange sweet juices of wonderful flowers.



With all these wonders Lirazel came for her son, and brought Elfland

with her that never had moved before the width of a harebell over the

earthly border. And where they met was an old garden of roses under the

towers of Erl, where once she had walked, and none had cared for it

since. Great weeds were now in its walks, and even they were withered

with the rigour of late November: their dry stalks hissed about his feet

as Orion walked through them, and they swung back brown behind him over

untended paths. But before him bloomed in all their glory and beauty the

great voluptuous roses gorgeous with Summer. Between November that she

was driving before her and that old season of roses that she brought

back to her garden Lirazel and Orion met. For a moment the withered

garden lay brown behind him, then it all flashed into bloom, and the

wild glad song of birds from a hundred arbours welcomed back the old

roses. And Orion was back again in the beauty and brightness of days

whose dim fair shades his memory cherished, such as are the chief of all

the treasures of man; but the treasury in which they lie is locked, and

we have not the key. Then Elfland poured over Erl.



Only the holy place of the Freer and the garden that was about it

remained still of our Earth, a little island all surrounded by wonder,

like a mountain peak all rocky, alone in air, when a mist wells up in

the gloaming from highland valleys, and leaves only one pinnacle darkly

to gaze at the stars. For the sound of his bell beat back the rune and

the twilight for a little distance all round. There he lived happy,

contented, not quite alone, amongst his holy things, for a few that had

been cut off by that magical tide lived on the holy island and served

him there. And he lived beyond the age of ordinary men, but not to the

years of magic.



None ever crossed the boundary but one, the witch Ziroonderel, who from

her hill that was just on the earthward border would go by broom on

starry nights to see her lady again, where she dwelt unvexed by years,

with Alveric and Orion. Thence she comes sometimes, high in the night on

her broom, unseen by any down on the earthly fields, unless you chance

to notice star after star blink out for an instant as she passes by

them, and sits beside cottage doors and tells queer tales, to such as

care to have news of the wonders of Elfland. May I hear her again!



And with the last of his world-disturbing runes sent forth, and his

daughter happy once more, the elfin King on his tremendous throne

breathed and drew in the calm in which Elfland basks; and all his realms

dreamed on in that ageless repose, of which deep green pools in summer

can barely guess; and Erl dreamed too with all the rest of Elfland and

so passed out of all remembrance of men. For the twelve that were of the

parliament of Erl looked through the window of that inner room, wherein

they planned their plans by the forge of Narl, and, gazing over their

familiar lands, perceived that they were no longer the fields we know.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 61077 ***



﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Gods of Pegana, by

Lord Dunsany [Edward J. M. D. Plunkett]



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions

whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms

of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at

www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you

will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before

using this eBook.



Title: The Gods of Pegana



Author: Lord Dunsany [Edward J. M. D. Plunkett]



Release Date: October 19, 2012 [EBook #8395]

Release Date: June, 2005

First Posted: July 6, 2003

Last Updated: August 15, 2023



Language: English



Character set encoding: UTF-8



Produced by: Beginners Projects, Anne Reshnyk and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GODS OF PEGANA ***









THE GODS OF PEGANA



LORD DUNSANY









CONTENTS





Preface



Introduction



Of Skarl the Drummer



Of the Making of the Worlds



Of the Game of the Gods



The Chaunt of the Gods



The Sayings of Kib



Concerning Sish



The Sayings of Slid



The Deeds of Mung



The Chaunt



The Sayings of Limpang-Tung



Of Yoharneth-Lahai



Of Roon, the God of Going, and the Thousand Home Gods



The Revolt of the Home Gods



Of Dorozhand



The Eye in the Waste



Of the Thing That Is Neither God Nor Beast



Yonath the Prophet



Yug the Prophet



Alhireth-Hotep The Prophet



Kabok The Prophet



Of the Calamity That Befel Yun-Hara by the Sea, and of the

Building of the Tower of the Ending of Days



Of How the Gods Whelmed Sidith



Of How Imbaun Became High Prophet in Aradec of all

the Gods Save One



Of How Imbaun Met Zodrak



Pegana



The Sayings of Imbaun



Of How Imbaun Spake of Death to the King



Of Ood



The River



The Bird of Doom and THE END









PREFACE





In the mists before THE BEGINNING, Fate and Chance cast lots to

decide whose the Game should be; and he that won strode through

the mists to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI and said: “Now make gods for Me, for

I have won the cast and the Game is to be Mine.” Who it was that

won the cast, and whether it was Fate or whether Chance that went

through the mists before THE BEGINNING to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI--_none

knoweth._









INTRODUCTION





Before there stood gods upon Olympus, or ever Allah was Allah, had

wrought and rested MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



There are in Pegana Mung and Sish and Kib, and the maker of all

small gods, who is MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI. Moreover, we have a faith in

Roon and Slid.



And it has been said of old that all things that have been were

wrought by the small gods, excepting only MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, who

made the gods and hath thereafter rested.



And none may pray to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI but only the gods whom he

hath made.



But at the Last will MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI forget to rest, and will

make again new gods and other worlds, and will destroy the gods

whom he hath made.



And the gods and the worlds shall depart, and there shall be only

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.









OF SKARL THE DRUMMER





When MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI had made the gods and Skarl, Skarl made a

drum, and began to beat upon it that he might drum for ever. Then

because he was weary after the making of the gods, and because of

the drumming of Skarl, did MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI grow drowsy and fall

asleep.



And there fell a hush upon the gods when they saw that MANA rested,

and there was silence on Pegana save for the drumming of Skarl.

Skarl sitteth upon the mist before the feet of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI,

above the gods of Pegana, and there he beateth his drum. Some say

that the Worlds and the Suns are but the echoes of the drumming of

Skarl, and others say that they be dreams that arise in the mind

of MANA because of the drumming of Skarl, as one may dream whose

rest is troubled by sound of song, but none knoweth, for who hath

heard the voice of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, or who hath seen his drummer?



Whether the season be winter or whether it be summer, whether it be

morning among the worlds or whether it be night, Skarl still beateth

his drum, for the purposes of the gods are not yet fulfilled. Sometimes

the arm of Skarl grows weary; but still he beateth his drum, that the

gods may do the work of the gods, and the worlds go on, for if he cease

for an instant then MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI will start awake, and there will

be worlds nor gods no more.



But, when at the last the arm of Skarl shall cease to beat his

drum, silence shall startle Pegana like thunder in a cave, and

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI shall cease to rest.



Then shall Skarl put his drum upon his back and walk forth into the

void beyond the worlds, because it is THE END, and the work of Skarl is

over.



There may arise some other god whom Skarl may serve, or it may be that

he shall perish; but to Skarl it shall matter not, for he shall have

done the work of Skarl.









OF THE MAKING OF THE WORLDS





When MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI had made the gods there were only the gods,

and They sat in the middle of Time, for there was as much Time

before them as behind them, which having no end had neither a

beginning.



And Pegana was without heat or light or sound, save for the

drumming of Skarl; moreover Pegana was The Middle of All, for

there was below Pegana what there was above it, and there lay

before it that which lay beyond.



Then said the gods, making the signs of the gods and speaking with

Their hands lest the silence of Pegana should blush; then said the

gods to one another, speaking with Their hands; “Let Us make

worlds to amuse Ourselves while MANA rests. Let Us make worlds and

Life and Death, and colours in the sky; only let Us not break the

silence upon Pegana.”



Then raising Their hands, each god according to his sign, They

made the worlds and the suns, and put a light in the houses of the

sky.



Then said the gods: “Let Us make one to seek, to seek and never to

find out concerning the wherefore of the making of the gods.”



And They made by the lifting of Their hands, each god according to

his sign, the Bright One with the flaring tail to seek from the

end of the Worlds to the end of them again, to return again after

a hundred years.



Man, when thou seest the comet, know that another seeketh besides

thee nor ever findeth out.



Then said the gods, still speaking with Their hands: “Let there be

now a Watcher to regard.”



And They made the Moon, with his face wrinkled with many mountains

and worn with a thousand valleys, to regard with pale eyes the

games of the small gods, and to watch throughout the resting time

of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI; to watch, to regard all things, and be

silent.



Then said the gods: “Let Us make one to rest. One not to move

among the moving. One not to seek like the comet, nor to go round

like the worlds; to rest while MANA rests.”



And They made the Star of the Abiding and set it in the North.



Man, when thou seest the Star of the Abiding to the North, know

that one resteth as doth MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, and know that somewhere

among the Worlds is rest.



Lastly the gods said: “We have made worlds and suns, and one to

seek and another to regard, let Us now make one to wonder.”



And They made Earth to wonder, each god by the uplifting of his

hand according to his sign.



And Earth was.









OF THE GAME OF THE GODS





A million years passed over the first game of the gods. And

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI still rested, still in the middle of Time, and

the gods still played with Worlds. The Moon regarded, and the

Bright One sought, and returned again to his seeking.



Then Kib grew weary of the first game of the gods, and raised his

hand in Pegana, making the sign of Kib, and Earth became covered

with beasts for Kib to play with.



And Kib played with beasts.



But the other gods said one to another, speaking with their hands:

“What is it that Kib has done?”



And They said to Kib: “What are these things that move upon The

Earth yet move not in circles like the Worlds, that regard like

the Moon and yet they do not shine?”



And Kib said: “This is Life.”



But the gods said one to another: “If Kib has thus made beasts he

will in time make Men, and will endanger the Secret of the gods.”



And Mung was jealous of the work of Kib, and sent down Death among

the beasts, but could not stamp them out.



A million years passed over the second game of the gods, and still

it was the Middle of Time.



And Kib grew weary of the second game, and raised his hand in the

Middle of All, making the sign of Kib, and made Men: out of beasts

he made them, and Earth was covered with Men.



Then the gods feared greatly for the Secret of the gods, and set a

veil between Man and his ignorance that he might not understand.

And Mung was busy among Men.



But when the other gods saw Kib playing his new game They came and

played it too. And this They will play until MANA arises to rebuke

Them, saying: “What do ye playing with Worlds and Suns and Men and

Life and Death?” And They shall be ashamed of Their playing in the

hour of the laughter of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



It was Kib who first broke the Silence of Pegana, by speaking with

his mouth like a man.



And all the other gods were angry with Kib that he had spoken with

his mouth.



And there was no longer silence in Pegana or the Worlds.









THE CHAUNT OF THE GODS





There came the voice of the gods singing the chaunt of the gods,

singing: “We are the gods; We are the little games of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI

that he hath played and hath forgotten.



“MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI hath made us, and We made the Worlds and the

Suns.



“And We play with the Worlds and the Sun and Life and Death until

MANA arises to rebuke us, saying: ‘What do ye playing with Worlds

and Suns?’



“It is a very serious thing that there be Worlds and Suns, and yet

most withering is the laughter of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



“And when he arises from resting at the Last, and laughs at us for

playing with Worlds and Suns, We will hastily put them behind us,

and there shall be Worlds no more.”









THE SAYINGS OF KIB



(Sender of Life in all the Worlds)





Kib said: “I am Kib. I am none other than Kib.”



Kib is Kib. Kib is he and no other. Believe! Kib said: “When

Time was early, when Time was very early indeed--there was only

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI. MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI was before the beginning of the

gods, and shall be after their going.”



And Kib said: “After the going of the gods there will be no small

worlds nor big.”



Kib said: “It will be lonely for MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.”



Because this is written, believe! For is it not written, or are

you greater than Kib? Kib is Kib.









CONCERNING SISH



(The Destroyer of Hours)





Time is the hound of Sish.



At Sish’s bidding do the hours run before him as he goeth upon

his way.



Never hath Sish stepped backward nor ever hath he tarried; never

hath he relented to the things that once he knew nor turned to

them again.



Before Sish is Kib, and behind him goeth Mung.



Very pleasant are all things before the face of Sish, but behind

him they are withered and old.



And Sish goeth ceaselessly upon his way.



Once the gods walked upon Earth as men walk and spake with their

mouths like Men. That was in Wornath-Mavai. They walk not now.



And Wornath-Mavai was a garden fairer than all the gardens upon

Earth.



Kib was propitious, and Mung raised not his hand against it,

neither did Sish assail it with his hours.



Wornath-Mavai lieth in a valley and looketh towards the south, and

on the slopes of it Sish rested among the flowers when Sish was

young.



Thence Sish went forth into the world to destroy its cities, and

to provoke his hours to assail all things, and to batter against

them with the rust and with the dust.



And Time, which is the hound of Sish, devoured all things; and

Sish sent up the ivy and fostered weeds, and dust fell from the

hand of Sish and covered stately things. Only the valley where

Sish rested when he and Time were young did Sish not provoke his

hours to assail.



There he restrained his old hound Time, and at its borders Mung

withheld his footsteps.



Wornath-Mavai still lieth looking towards the south, a garden

among gardens, and still the flowers grow about its slopes as they

grew when the gods were young; and even the butterflies live in

Wornath-Mavai still. For the minds of the gods relent towards

their earliest memories, who relent not otherwise at all.



Wornath-Mavai still lieth looking towards the south; but if thou

shouldst ever find it thou art then more fortunate than the gods,

because they walk not in Wornath-Mavai now.



Once did the prophet think that he discerned it in the distance

beyond mountains, a garden exceeding fair with flowers; but Sish

arose, and pointed with his hand, and set his hound to pursue him,

who hath followed ever since.



Time is the hound of the gods; but it hath been said of old that

he will one day turn upon his masters, and seek to slay the gods,

excepting only MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, whose dreams are the gods

themselves--dreamed long ago.









THE SAYINGS OF SLID



(Whose Soul is by the Sea)





Slid said: “Let no man pray to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, for who shall

trouble MANA with mortal woes or irk him with the sorrows of all

the houses of Earth?



“Nor let any sacrifice to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, for what glory shall

he find in sacrifices or altars who hath made the gods themselves?



“Pray to the small gods, who are the gods of Doing; but MANA is

the god of Having Done--the god of Having Done and of the Resting.



“Pray to the small gods and hope that they may hear thee. Yet what

mercy should the small gods have, who themselves made Death and

Pain; or shall they restrain their old hound Time for thee?



“Slid is but a small god. Yet Slid is Slid--it is written and hath

been said.



“Pray, thou, therefore, to Slid, and forget not Slid, and it may

be that Slid will not forget to send thee Death when most thou

needest it.”



And the People of Earth said: “There is a melody upon the Earth as

though ten thousand streams all sang together for their homes that

they had forsaken in the hills.”



And Slid said: “I am the Lord of gliding waters and of foaming

waters and of still. I am the Lord of all the waters in the world

and all that long streams garner in the hills; but the soul of

Slid is in the Sea. Thither goes all that glides upon Earth, and

the end of all the rivers is the Sea.”



And Slid said: “The hand of Slid hath toyed with cataracts, and

down the valleys have trod the feet of Slid, and out of the lakes

of the plains regard the eyes of Slid; but the soul of Slid is in

the sea.”



Much homage hath Slid among the cities of men and pleasant are the

woodland paths and the paths of the plains, and pleasant the high

valleys where he danceth in the hills; but Slid would be fettered

neither by banks nor boundaries--so the soul of Slid is in the

Sea.



For there may Slid repose beneath the sun and smile at the gods

above him with all the smiles of Slid, and be a happier god than

Those who sway the Worlds, whose work is Life and Death.



There may he sit and smile, or creep among the ships, or moan and

sigh round islands in his great content--the miser lord of wealth

in gems and pearls beyond the telling of all fables.



Or there may he, when Slid would fain exult, throw up his great

arms, or toss with many a fathom of wandering hair the mighty head

of Slid, and cry aloud tumultuous dirges of shipwreck, and feel

through all his being the crashing might of Slid, and sway the

sea. Then doth the Sea, like venturous legions on the eve of war

that exult to acclaim their chief, gather its force together from

under all the winds and roar and follow and sing and crash

together to vanquish all things--and all at the bidding of Slid,

whose soul is in the sea.



There is ease in the soul of Slid and there be calms upon the sea;

also, there be storms upon the sea and troubles in the soul of

Slid, for the gods have many moods. And Slid is in many places,

for he sitteth in high Pegana. Also along the valleys walketh

Slid, wherever water moveth or lieth still; but the voice and the

cry of Slid are from the sea. And to whoever that cry hath ever

come he must needs follow and follow, leaving all stable things;

only to be always with Slid in all the moods of Slid, to find no

rest until he reaches the sea.



With the cry of Slid before them and the hills of their home behind

have gone a hundred thousand to the sea, over whose bones doth Slid

lament with the voice of a god lamenting for his people. Even the

streams from the inner lands have heard Slid’s far-off cry, and all

together have forsaken lawns and trees to follow where Slid is

gathering up his own, to rejoice where Slid rejoices, singing the

chaunt of Slid, even as will at the Last gather all the Lives of

the People about the feet of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.









THE DEEDS OF MUNG



(Lord of all Deaths between Pegana and the Rim)





Once, as Mung went his way athwart the Earth and up and down its

cities and across its plains, Mung came upon a man who was afraid

when Mung said: “I am Mung!”



And Mung said: “Were the forty million years before thy coming

intolerable to thee?”



And Mung said: “Not less tolerable to thee shall be the forty

million years to come!”



Then Mung made against him the sign of Mung and the Life of the

Man was fettered no longer with hands and feet.



At the end of the flight of the arrow there is Mung, and in the

houses and the cities of Men. Mung walketh in all places at all

times. But mostly he loves to walk in the dark and still, along

the river mists when the wind hath sank, a little before night

meeteth with the morning upon the highway between Pegana and

the Worlds.



Sometimes Mung entereth the poor man’s cottage; Mung also boweth

very low before The King. Then do the Lives of the poor man and of

The King go forth among the Worlds.



And Mung said: “Many turnings hath the road that Kib hath given

every man to tread upon the earth. Behind one of these turnings

sitteth Mung.”



One day as a man trod upon the road that Kib had given him to

tread he came suddenly upon Mung. And when Mung said: “I am Mung!”

the man cried out: “Alas, that I took this road, for had I gone by

any other way then had I not met with Mung.”



And Mung said: “Had it been possible for thee to go by any other

way then had the Scheme of Things been otherwise and the gods had

been other gods. When MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI forgets to rest and makes

again new gods it may be that They will send thee again into the

Worlds; and then thou mayest choose some other way, and not meet

with Mung.”



Then Mung made the sign of Mung. And the Life of that man went

forth with yesterday’s regrets and all old sorrows and forgotten

things--whither Mung knoweth.



And Mung went onward with his work to sunder Life from flesh, and

Mung came upon a man who became stricken with sorrow when he saw

the shadow of Mung. But Mung said: “When at the sign of Mung thy

Life shall float away there will also disappear thy sorrow at

forsaking it.” But the man cried out: “O Mung! tarry for a little,

and make not the sign of Mung against me now, for I have a family

upon the earth with whom sorrow will remain, though mine should

disappear because of the sign of Mung.”



And Mung said: “With the gods it is always Now. And before Sish

hath banished many of the years the sorrows of thy family for thee

shall go the way of thine.” And the man beheld Mung making the

sign of Mung before his eyes, which beheld things no more.









THE CHAUNT OF THE PRIESTS





This is the chaunt of the Priests.



The chaunt of the priests of Mung.



This is the chaunt of the Priests.



All day long to Mung cry out the Priests of Mung, and, yet Mung

harkeneth not. What, then, shall avail the prayers of All the

People?



Rather bring gifts to the Priests, gifts to the Priests of Mung.



So shall they cry louder unto Mung than ever was their wont.



And it may be that Mung shall hear.



Not any longer than shall fall the Shadow of Mung athwart the

hopes of the People.



Not any longer then shall the Tread of Mung darken the dreams of

the people.



Not any longer shall the lives of the People be loosened because

of Mung.



Bring ye gifts to the Priests, gifts to the Priests of Mung.



This is the chaunt of the Priests.



The chaunt of the Priests of Mung.



This is the chaunt of the Priests.









THE SAYINGS OF LIMPANG-TUNG



(The God of Mirth and of Melodious Minstrels)





And Limpang-Tung said: “The ways of the gods are strange. The

flower groweth up and the flower fadeth away. This may be very

clever of the gods. Man groweth from his infancy, and in a while

he dieth. This may be very clever too.



“But the gods play with a strange scheme.



“I will send jests into the world and a little mirth. And while

Death seems to thee as far away as the purple rim of hills; or

sorrow as far off as rain in the blue days of summer, then pray to

Limpang-Tung. But when thou growest old, or ere thou diest, pray

not of Limpang-Tung, for thou becomest part of a scheme that he

doth not understand.



“Go out into the starry night, and Limpang-Tung will dance with

thee who danced since the gods were young, the god of mirth and of

melodious minstrels. Or offer up a jest to Limpang-Tung; only pray

not in thy sorrow to Limpang-Tung, for he saith of sorrow: ‘It may

be very clever of the gods,’ but he doth not understand.”



And Limpang-Tung said: “I am lesser than the gods; pray,

therefore, to the small gods and not to Limpang-Tung.



“Natheless between Pegana and the Earth flutter ten thousand

thousand prayers that beat their wings against the face of Death,

and never for one of them hath the hand of the Striker been

stayed, nor yet have tarried the feet of the Relentless One.



“Utter thy prayer! It may accomplish where failed ten thousand

thousand.



“Limpang-Tung is lesser than the gods, and doth not understand.”



And Limpang-Tung said: “Lest men grow weary down on the great

Worlds through gazing always at a changeless sky, I will paint my

pictures in the sky. And I will paint them twice in every day for

so long as days shall be. Once as the day ariseth out of the homes

of dawn will I paint the Blue, that men may see and rejoice; and

ere day falleth under into the night will I paint upon the Blue

again, lest men be sad.



“It is a little,” said Limpang-Tung, “it is a little even for a

god to give some pleasure to men upon the Worlds.”



And Limpang-Tung hath sworn that the pictures that he paints shall

never be the same for so long as the days shall be, and this he

hath sworn by the oath of the gods of Pegana that the gods may

never break, laying his hand upon the shoulder of each of the gods

and swearing by the light behind Their eyes.



Limpang-Tung hath lured a melody out of the stream and stolen its

anthem from the forest; for him the wind hath cried in lonely places

and the ocean sung its dirges. There is music for Limpang-Tung in

the sounds of the moving of grass and in the voices of the people

that lament or in the cry of them that rejoice.



In an inner mountain land where none hath come he hath carved his

organ pipes out of the mountains, and there when the winds, his

servants, come in from all the world he maketh the melody of

Limpang-Tung. But the song, arising at night, goeth forth like a

river, winding through all the world, and here and there amid the

peoples of earth one heareth, and straightaway all that hath voice

to sing crieth aloud in music to his soul.



Or sometimes walking through the dusk with steps unheard by men,

in a form unseen by the people, Limpang-Tung goeth abroad, and,

standing behind the minstrels in cities of song, waveth his hands

above them to and fro, and the minstrels bend to their work, and

the voice of the music ariseth; and mirth and melody abound in

that city of song, and no one seeth Limpang-Tung as he standeth

behind the minstrels.



But through the mists towards morning, in the dark when the

minstrels sleep and mirth and melody have sunk to rest, Limpang-Tung

goeth back again to his mountain land.









OF YOHARNETH-LAHAI



(The God of Little Dreams and Fancies)





Yaoharneth-Lahai is the god of little dreams and fancies.



All night he sendeth little dreams out of Pegana to please the

people of Earth.



He sendeth little dreams to the poor man and to The King.



He is so busy to send his dreams to all before the night be ended

that oft he forgetteth which be the poor man and which be The

King.



To whom Yoharneth-Lahai cometh not with little dreams and sleep he

must endure all night the laughter of the gods, with highest

mockery, in Pegana.



All night long Yoharneth-Lahai giveth peace to cities until the

dawn hour and the departing of Yoharneth-Lahai, when it is time

for the gods to play with men again.



Whether the dreams and the fancies of Yoharneth-Lahai be false and

the Things that are done in the Day be real, or the Things that

are done in the Day be false and the dreams and the fancies of

Yoharneth-Lahai be true, none knoweth saving only MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI,

who hath not spoken.









OF ROON, THE GOD OF GOING, AND THE THOUSAND HOME GODS





Roon said: “There be gods of moving and gods of standing still,

but I am the god of Going.”



It is because of Roon that the worlds are never still, for the

moons and the worlds and the comet are stirred by the spirit of

Roon, which saith: “Go! Go! Go!”



Roon met the Worlds all in the morning of Things, before there was

light upon Pegana, and Roon danced before them in the Void, since

when they are never still, Roon sendeth all streams to the Sea,

and all the rivers to the soul of Slid.



Roon maketh the sign of Roon before the waters, and lo! they have

left the hills; and Roon hath spoken in the ear of the North Wind

that he may be still no more.



The footfall of Roon hath been heard at evening outside the houses

of men, and thenceforth comfort and abiding know them no more.

Before them stretcheth travel over all the lands, long miles, and

never resting between their homes and their graves--and all at the

bidding of Roon.



The Mountains have set no limit against Roon nor all the seas a

boundary.



Whither Roon hath desired there must Roon’s people go, and the

worlds and their streams and the winds.



I heard the whisper of Roon at evening, saying: “There are islands

of spices to the South,” and the voice of Roon saying: “Go.”



And Roon said: “There are a thousand home gods, the little gods

that sit before the hearth and mind the fire--there is one Roon.”



Roon saith in a whisper, in a whisper when none heareth, when the

sun is low: “What doeth MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI?” Roon is no god that

thou mayest worship by thy hearth, nor will he be benignant to thy

home.



Offer to Roon thy toiling and thy speed, whose incense is the

smoke of the camp fire to the South, whose song is the sound of

going, whose temples stand beyond the farthest hills in his lands

behind the East.



Yarinareth, Yarinareth, Yarinareth, which signifieth Beyond--these

words be carved in letters of gold upon the arch of the great portal

of the Temple of Roon that men have builded looking towards the East

upon the Sea, where Roon is carved as a giant trumpeter, with his

trumpet pointing towards the East beyond the Seas.



Whoso heareth his voice, the voice of Roon at evening, he at once

forsaketh the home gods that sit beside the hearth. These be the

gods of the hearth: Pitsu, who stroketh the cat; Hobith who calms

the dog; and Habaniah, the lord of glowing embers; and little

Zumbiboo, the lord of dust; and old Gribaun, who sits in the heart

of the fire to turn the wood to ash--all these be home gods, and

live not in Pegana and be lesser than Roon.



There is also Kilooloogung, the lord of arising smoke, who taketh

the smoke from the hearth and sendeth it to the sky, who is

pleased if it reacheth Pegana, so that the gods of Pegana,

speaking to the gods, say: “There is Kilooloogung doing the work

on earth of Kilooloogung.”



All these are gods so small that they be lesser than men, but

pleasant gods to have beside the hearth; and often men have prayed

to Kilooloogung, saying: “Thou whose smoke ascendeth to Pegana

send up with it our prayers, that the gods may hear.” And

Kilooloogung, who is pleased that men should pray, stretches

himself up all grey and lean, with his arms above his head, and

sendeth his servant the smoke to seek Pegana, that the gods of

Pegana may know that the people pray.



And Jabim is the Lord of broken things, who sitteth behind the

house to lament the things that are cast away. And there he

sitteth lamenting the broken things until the worlds be ended, or

until someone cometh to mend the broken things. Or sometimes he

sitteth by the river’s edge to lament the forgotten things that

drift upon it.



A kindly god is Jabim, whose heart is sore if anything be lost.



There is also Triboogie, the Lord of Dusk, whose children are the

shadows, who sitteth in a corner far off from Habaniah and

speaketh to none. But after Habaniah hath gone to sleep and old

Gribaun hath blinked a hundred times, until he forgetteth which be

wood or ash, then doth Triboogie send his children to run about

the room and dance upon the walls, but never disturb the silence.



But when there is light again upon the worlds, and dawn comes

dancing down the highway from Pegana, then does Triboogie retire

into his corner, with his children all around him, as though they

had never danced about the room. And the slaves of Habaniah and

old Gribaun come and awake them from their sleep upon the hearth,

and Pitsu strokes the cat, and Hobith calms the dog, and

Kilooloogung stretches aloft his arms towards Pegana, and

Triboogie is very still, and his children asleep.



And when it is dark, all in the hour of Triboogie, Hish creepeth

from the forest, the Lord of Silence, whose children are the bats,

that have broken the command of their father, but in a voice that

is ever so low. Hish husheth the mouse and all the whispers in the

night; he maketh all noises still. Only the cricket rebelleth. But

Hish hath set against him such a spell that after he hath cried a

thousand times his voice may be heard no more but becometh part of

the silence.



And when he hath slain all sounds Hish boweth low to the ground;

then cometh into the house, with never a sound of feet, the god

Yoharneth-Lahai.



But away in the forest whence Hish hath come Wohoon, the Lord of

Noises in the Night, awaketh in his lair and creepeth round the

forest to see whether it be true that Hish hath gone.



Then in some glade Wohoon lifts up his voice and cries aloud, that

all the night may hear, that it is he, Wohoon, who is abroad in

all the forest. And the wolf and the fox and the owl, and the

great beasts and the small, lift up their voices to acclaim

Wohoon. And there arise the sounds of voices and the stirring of

leaves.









THE REVOLT OF THE HOME GODS





There be three broad rivers of the plain, born before memory or

fable, whose mothers are three grey peaks and whose father was the

storm. There names be EimÎs, Z‰nÎs, and Seg·strion.



And EimÎs is the joy of lowing herds; and Z‰nÎs hath bowed his

neck to the yoke of man, and carries the timber from the forest

far up below the mountain; and Seg·strion sings old songs to

shepherd boys, singing of his childhood in a lone ravine and of

how he once sprang down the mountain sides and far away into the

plain to see the world, and of how one day at last he will find

the sea. These be the rivers of the plain, wherein the plain

rejoices. But old men tell, whose fathers heard it from the

ancients, how once the lords of the three rivers of the plain

rebelled against the law of the Worlds, and passed beyond their

boundaries, and joined together and whelmed cities and slew men,

saying: “We now play the game of the gods and slay men for our

pleasure, and we be greater than the gods of Pegana.”



And all the plain was flooded to the hills.



And EimÎs, Z‰nÎs, and Seg·strion sat upon the mountains, and

spread their hands over their rivers that rebelled by their

command.



But the prayer of men going upward found Pegana, and cried in the

ear of the gods: “There be three home gods who slay us for their

pleasure, and say that they be mightier than Pegana’s gods, and

play Their game with men.”



Then were all the gods of Pegana very wroth; but They could not

whelm the lords of the three rivers, because being home gods,

though small, they were immortal.



And still the home gods spread their hands across their rivers,

with their fingers wide apart, and the waters rose and rose, and

the voice of their torrent grew louder, crying: “Are we not EimÎs,

Z‰nÎs, and Seg·strion?”



Then Mung went down into a waste of Afrik, and came upon the

drought Umbool as he sat in the desert upon iron rocks, clawing

with miserly grasp at the bones of men and breathing hot.



And Mung stood before him as his dry sides heaved, and ever as

they sank his hot breath blasted dry sticks and bones.



Then Mung said: “Friend of Mung! Go, thou and grin before the

faces of EimÎs, Z‰nÎs, and Seg·strion till they see whether it be

wise to rebel against the gods of Pegana.”



And Umbool answered: “I am the beast of Mung.”



And Umbool came and crouched upon a hill upon the other side of

the waters and grinned across them at the rebellious home gods.



And whenever EimÎs, Z‰nÎs, and Seg·strion stretched out their

hands over their rivers they saw before their faces the grinning

of Umbool; and because the grinning was like death in a hot and

hideous land therefore they turned away and spread their hands no

more over their rivers, and the waters sank and sank.



But when Umbool had grinned for thirty days the waters fell back

into the river beds and the lords of the rivers slunk away back

again to their homes: still Umbool sat and grinned.



Then EimÎs sought to hide himself in a great pool beneath a rock,

and Z‰nÎs crept into the middle of a wood, and Seg·strion lay and

panted on the sand--still Umbool sat and grinned.



And EimÎs grew lean, and was forgotten, so that the men of the

plain would say: “Here once was EimÎs”; and Z‰nÎs scarce had

strength to lead his river to the sea; and as Seg·strion lay and

panted a man stepped over his stream, and Seg·strion said: “It is

the foot of a man that has passed across my neck, and I have sought

to be greater than the gods of Pegana.”



Then said the gods of Pegana: “It is enough. We are the gods of

Pegana, and none are equal.”



Then Mung sent Umbool back to his waste in Afrik to breathe again

upon the rocks, and parch the desert, and to sear the memory of

Afrik into the brains of all who ever bring their bones away.



And EimÎs, Z‰nÎs, and Seg·strion sang again, and walked once more

in their accustomed haunts, and played the game of Life and Death

with fishes and frogs, but never essayed to play it any more with

men, as do the gods of Pegana.









OF DOROZHAND



(Whose Eyes Regard The End)





Sitting above the lives of the people, and looking, doth Dorozhand

see that which is to be.



The god of Destiny is Dorozhand. Upon whom have looked the eyes of

Dorozhand he goeth forward to an end that naught may stay; he

becometh the arrow from the bow of Dorozhand hurled forward at a

mark he may not see--to the goal of Dorozhand. Beyond the thinking

of men, beyond the sight of all the other gods, regard the eyes of

Dorozhand.



He hath chosen his slaves. And them doth the destiny god drive

onward where he will, who, knowing not whither nor even knowing

why, feel only his scourge behind them or hear his cry before.



There is something that Dorozhand would fain achieve, and,

therefore, hath he set the people striving, with none to cease or

rest in all the worlds. But the gods of Pegana, speaking to the

gods, say: “What is it that Dorozhand would fain achieve?”



It hath been written and said that not only the destinies of men

are the care of Dorozhand but that even the gods of Pegana be not

unconcerned by his will.



All the gods of Pegana have felt a fear, for they have seen a look

in the eyes of Dorozhand that regardeth beyond the gods.



The reason and purpose of the Worlds is that there should be Life

upon the Worlds, and Life is the instrument of Dorozhand wherewith

he would achieve his end.



Therefore the Worlds go on, and the rivers run to the sea, and Life

ariseth and flieth even in all the Worlds, and the gods of Pegana

do the work of the gods--and all for Dorozhand. But when the end of

Dorozhand hath been achieved there will be need no longer of Life upon

the Worlds, nor any more a game for the small gods to play. Then will

Kib tiptoe gently across Pegana to the resting-place in Highest Pegana

of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, and touching reverently his hand, the hand that

wrought the gods, say: “MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, thou hast rested long.”



And MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI shall say: “Not so; for I have rested for but

fifty aeons of the gods, each of them scarce more than ten million

mortal years of the Worlds that ye have made.”



And then shall the gods be afraid when they find that MANA knoweth

that they have made Worlds while he rested. And they shall answer:

“Nay; but the Worlds came all of themselves.”



Then MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, as one who would have done with an irksome

matter, will lightly wave his hand--the hand that wrought the

gods--and there shall be gods no more.



When there shall be three moons towards the north above the Star

of the Abiding, three moons that neither wax nor wane but regard

towards the North.



Or when the comet ceaseth from his seeking and stands still, not any

longer moving among the Worlds but tarrying as one who rests after

the end of search, then shall arise from resting, because it is THE

END, the Greater One, who rested of old time, even MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



Then shall the Times that were be Times no more; and it may be

that the old, dead days shall return from beyond the Rim, and we

who have wept for them shall see those days again, as one who,

returning from long travel to his home, comes suddenly on dear,

remembered things.



For none shall know of MANA who hath rested for so long, whether

he be a harsh or merciful god. It may be that he shall have mercy,

and that these things shall be.









THE EYE IN THE WASTE





There lie seven deserts beyond Bodrahan, which is the city of the

caravans’ end. None goeth beyond. In the first desert lie the

tracks of mighty travellers outward from Bodrahan, and some

returning. And in the second lie only outward tracks, and none

return.



The third is a desert untrodden by the feet of men.



The fourth is the desert of sand, and the fifth is the desert of

dust, and the sixth is the desert of stones, and the seventh is

the Desert of Deserts.



In the midst of the last of the deserts that lie beyond Bodrahan,

in the centre of the Desert of Deserts, standeth the image that

hath been hewn of old out of the living hill whose name is

Ranorada--the eye in the waste.



About the base of Ranorada is carved in mystic letters that are

vaster than the beds of streams these words:



To the god who knows.



Now, beyond the second desert are no tracks, and there is no water

in all the seven deserts that lie beyond Bodrahan. Therefore came

no man thither to hew that statue from the living hills, and

Ranorada was wrought by the hands of gods. Men tell in Bodrahan,

where the caravans end and all the drivers of the camels rest, how

once the gods hewed Ranorada from the living hill, hammering all

night long beyond the deserts. Moreover, they say that Ranorada is

carved in the likeness of the god Hoodrazai, who hath found the

secret of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, and knoweth the wherefore of the making

of the gods.



They say that Hoodrazai stands all alone in Pegana and speaks to

none because he knows what is hidden from the gods.



Therefore the gods have made his image in a lonely land as one who

thinks and is silent--the eye in the waste.



They say that Hoodrazai had heard the murmers of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI

as he muttered to himself, and gleaned the meaning, and knew; and

that he was the god of mirth and of abundant joy, but became from

the moment of his knowing a mirthless god, even as his image,

which regards the deserts beyond the track of man.



But the camel drivers, as they sit and listen to the tales of the

old men in the market-place of Bodrahan, at evening, while the

camels rest, say:



“If Hoodrazai is so very wise and yet is sad, let us drink wine,

and banish wisdom to the wastes that lie beyond Bodrahan.”

Therefore is there feasting and laughter all night long in the

city where the caravans end.



All this the camel drivers tell when the caravans come in from

Bodrahan; but who shall credit tales that camel drivers have heard

from aged men in so remote a city?









OF THE THING THAT IS NEITHER GOD NOR BEAST





Seeing that wisdom is not in cities nor happiness in wisdom, and

because Yadin the prophet was doomed by the gods ere he was born

to go in search of wisdom, he followed the caravans to Bodrahan.

There in the evening, where the camels rest, when the wind of the

day ebbs out into the desert sighing amid the palms its last

farewells and leaving the caravans still, he sent his prayer with

the wind to drift into the desert calling to Hoodrazai.



And down the wind his prayer went calling: “Why do the gods

endure, and play their game with men? Why doth not Skarl forsake

his drumming, and MANA cease to rest?” and the echo of seven

deserts answered: “Who knows? Who knows?”



But out in the waste, beyond the seven deserts where Ranorada

looms enormous in the dusk, at evening his prayer was heard; and

from the rim of the waste whither had gone his prayer, came three

flamingoes flying, and their voices said: “Going South, Going

South” at every stroke of their wings.



But as they passed by the prophet they seemed so cool and free and

the desert so blinding and hot that he stretched up his arms

towards them. Then it seemed happy to fly and pleasant to follow

behind great white wings, and he was with the three flamingoes up

in the cool above the desert, and their voices cried before him:

“Going South, Going South,” and the desert below him mumbled: “Who

knows? Who knows?”



Sometimes the earth stretched up towards them with peaks of

mountains, sometimes it fell away in steep ravines, blue rivers

sang to them as they passed above them, or very faintly came the

song of breezes in lone orchards, and far away the sea sang mighty

dirges of old forsaken isles. But it seemed that in all the world

there was nothing only to be going South.



It seemed that somewhere the South was calling to her own, and

that they were going South.



But when the prophet saw that they had passed above the edge of

Earth, and that far away to the North of them lay the Moon, he

perceived that he was following no mortal birds but some strange

messengers of Hoodrazai whose nest had lain in one of Pegana’s

vales below the mountains whereon sit the gods.



Still they went South, passing by all the Worlds and leaving them

to the North, till only Araxes, Zadres, and Hyraglion lay still to

the South of them, where great Ingazi seemed only a point of

light, and Yo and Mindo could be seen no more.



Still they went South till they passed below the South and came to

the Rim of the Worlds.



There there is neither South nor East nor West, but only North and

Beyond; there is only North of it where lie the Worlds, and Beyond

it where lies the Silence, and the Rim is a mass of rocks that

were never used by the gods when They made the Worlds, and on it

sat Trogool. Trogool is the Thing that is neither god nor beast,

who neither howls nor breathes, only _It_ turns over the

leaves of a great book, black and white, black and white for ever

until THE END.



And all that is to be is written in the book is also all that was.



When _It_ turneth a black page it is night, and when _It_ turneth a

white page it is day.



Because it is written that there are gods--there are the gods.



Also there is writing about thee and me until the page where our names

no more are written.



Then as the prophet watched _It_, Trogool turned a page--a

black one, and night was over, and day shone on the Worlds.



Trogool is the Thing that men in many countries have called by

many names, _It_ is the Thing that sits behind the gods,

whose book is the Scheme of Things.



But when Yadin saw that old remembered days were hidden away with

the part that _It_ had turned, and knew that upon one whose

name is writ no more the last page had turned for ever a thousand

pages back. Then did he utter his prayer in the fact of Trogool

who only turns the pages and never answers prayer. He prayed in

the face of Trogool: “Only turn back thy pages to the name of one

which is writ no more, and far away upon a place named Earth shall

rise the prayers of a little people that acclaim the name of

Trogool, for there is indeed far off a place called Earth where

men shall pray to Trogool.”



Then spake Trogool who turns the pages and never answers prayer,

and his voice was like the murmurs of the waste at night when

echoes have been lost: “Though the whirlwind of the South should

tug with his claws at a page that hath been turned yet shall he

not be able to ever turn it back.”



Then because of words in the book that said that it should be so,

Yadin found himself lying in the desert where one gave him water,

and afterwards carried him on a camel into Bodrahan.



There some said that he had but dreamed when thirst seized him

while he wandered among the rocks in the desert. But certain aged

men of Bodrahan say that indeed there sitteth somewhere a Thing

that is called Trogool, that is neither god nor beast, that

turneth the leaves of a book, black and white, black and white,

until he come to the words: _Mai Doon Izahn_, which means The

End For Ever, and book and gods and worlds shall be no more.









YONATH THE PROPHET





Yonath was the first among prophets who uttered unto men.



These are the words of Yonath, the first among all prophets:



There be gods upon Pegana.



Upon a night I slept. And in my sleep Pegana came very near. And

Pegana was full of gods.



I saw the gods beside me as one might see wonted things.



Only I saw not MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



And in that hour, in the hour of my sleep, I knew.



And the end and the beginning of my knowing, and all of my knowing

that there was, was this--that Man Knoweth Not.



Seek thou to find at night the utter edge of the darkness, or seek

to find the birthplace of the rainbow where he leapeth upward from

the hills, only seek not concerning the wherefore of the making of

the gods.



The gods have set a brightness upon the farther side of the Things

to Come that they may appear more felititous to men than the

Things that Are.



To the gods the Things to Come are but as the Things that Are, and

nothing altereth in Pegana.



The gods, although not merciful, are not ferocious gods. They are

the destroyers of the Days that Were, but they set a glory about

the Days to Be.



Man must endure the Days that Are, but the gods have left him his

ignorance as a solace.



Seek not to know. Thy seeking will weary thee, and thou wilt

return much worn, to rest at last about the place from whence thou

settest out upon thy seeking.



Seek not to know. Even I, Yonath, the oldest prophet, burdened

with the wisdom of great years, and worn with seeking, know only

that man knoweth not.



Once I set out seeking to know all things. Now I know one thing

only, and soon the Years will carry me away.



The path of my seeking, that leadeth to seeking again, must be

trodden by very many more, when Yonath is no longer even Yonath.



Set not thy foot upon that path.



Seek not to know.



These be the Words of Yonath.









YUG THE PROPHET





When the Years had carried away Yonath, and Yonath was dead,

there was no longer a prophet among men.



And still men sought to know.



Therefore they said unto Yug: “Be thou our prophet, and know all

things, and tell us concerning the wherefore of It All.”



And Yug said: “I know all things.” And men were pleased.



And Yug said of the Beginning that it was in Yug’s own garden, and

of the End that it was in the sight of Yug.



And men forgot Yug.



One day Yug saw Mung behind the hills making the sign of Mung. And

Yug was Yug no more.









ALHIRETH-HOTEP THE PROPHET





When Yug was Yug no more men said unto Alhireth-Hotep: “Be thou

our prophet, and be as wise as Yug.”



And Alhireth-Hotep said: “I am as wise as Yug.” And men were very

glad.



And Alhireth-Hotep said of Life and Death: “These be the affairs

of Alhireth-Hotep.” And men brought gifts to him.



One day Alhireth-Hotep wrote in a book: “Alhireth-Hotep knoweth

All Things, for he hath spoken with Mung.”



And Mung stepped from behind him, making the sign of Mung, saying:

“Knowest thou All Things, then, Alhireth-Hotep?” And Alhireth-Hotep

became among the Things that Were.









KABOK THE PROPHET



When Alhireth-Hotep was among the Things that Were, and still men

sought to know, they said unto Kabok: “Be thou as wise as was

Alhireth-Hotep.”



And Kabok grew wise in his own sight and in the sight of men.



And Kabok said: “Mung maketh his signs against men or withholdeth

it by the advice of Kabok.”



And he said unto one: “Thou hast sinned against Kabok, therefore

will Mung make the sign of Mung against thee.” And to another:

“Thou has brought Kabok gifts, therefore shall Mung forbear to

make against thee the sign of Mung.”



One night as Kabok fattened upon the gifts that men had brought

him he heard the tread of Mung treading in the garden of Kabok

about his house at night.



And because the night was very still it seemed most evil to Kabok

that Mung should be treading in his garden, without the advice of

Kabok, about his house at night.



And Kabok, who knew All Things, grew afraid, for the treading was

very loud and the night still, and he knew not what lay behind the

back of Mung, which none had ever seen.



But when the morning grew to brightness, and there was light upon

the Worlds, and Mung trod no longer in the garden, Kabok forgot

his fears, and said: “Perhaps it was but a herd of cattle that

stampeded in the garden of Kabok.”



And Kabok went about his business, which was that of knowing All

Things, and telling All Things unto men, and making light of Mung.



But that night Mung trod again in the garden of Kabok, about his

house at night, and stood before the window of the house like a

shadow standing erect, so that Kabok knew indeed that it was Mung.



And a great fear fell upon the throat of Kabok, so that his speech

was hoarse; and he cried out: “Thou art Mung!”



And Mung slightly inclined his head, and went on to tread in the

garden of Kabok, about his house at night.



And Kabok lay and listened with horror at his heart.



But when the second morning grew to brightness, and there was

light upon the Worlds, Mung went from treading in the garden of

Kabok; and for a little while Kabok hoped, but looked with great

dread for the coming of the third night.



And when the third night was come, and the bat had gone to his

home, and the wind had sank, the night was very still.



And Kabok lay and listened, to whom the wings of the night flew

very slow.



But, ere night met the morning upon the highway between Pegana and

the Worlds, there came the tread of Mung in the garden of Kabok

towards Kabok’s door.



And Kabok fled out of his house as flees a hunted beast and flung

himself before Mung.



And Mung made the sign of Mung, pointing towards THE END.



And the fears of Kabok had rest from troubling Kabok any more, for

they and he were among accomplished things.









OF THE CALAMITY THAT BEFEL YUN-ILARA BY THE SEA, AND OF THE

BUILDING OF THE TOWER OF THE ENDING OF DAYS





When Kabok and his fears had rest the people sought a prophet who

should have no fear of Mung, whose hand was against the prophets.



And at last they found Yun-Ilara, who tended sheep and had no fear

of Mung, and the people brought him to the town that he might be

their prophet.



And Yun-Ilara builded a tower towards the sea that looked upon the

setting of the Sun. And he called it the Tower of the Ending of

Days.



And about the ending of the day would Yun-Ilara go up to his

tower’s top and look towards the setting of the Sun to cry his

curses against Mung, crying: “O Mung! whose hand is against the

Sun, whom men abhor but worship because they fear thee, here stands

and speaks a man who fears thee not. Assassin lord of murder and

dark things, abhorrent, merciless, make thou the sign of Mung

against me when thou wilt, but until silence settles upon my lips,

because of the sign of Mung, I will curse Mung to his face.” And

the people in the street below would gaze up with wonder towards

Yun-Ilara, who had no fear of Mung, and brought him gifts; only in

their homes after the falling of the night would they pray again

with reverence to Mung. But Mung said: “Shall a man curse a god?”



And still Mung came not nigh to Yun-Ilara as he cried his curses

against Mung from his tower towards the sea.



And Sish throughout the Worlds hurled Time away, and slew the

Hours that had served him well, and called up more out of the

timeless waste that lieth beyond the Worlds, and drave them forth

to assail all things. And Sish cast a whiteness over the hairs of

Yun-Ilara, and ivy about his tower, and weariness over his limbs,

for Mung passed by him still.



And when Sish became a god less durable to Yun-Ilara than ever

Mung hath been he ceased at last to cry from his tower’s top his

curses against Mung whenever the sun went down, till there came

the day when weariness of the gift of Kib fell heavily upon

Yun-Ilara.



Then from the tower of the Ending of Days did Yun-Ilara cry out

thus to Mung, crying: “O Mung! O loveliest of the gods! O Mung,

most dearly to be desired! thy gift of Death is the heritage of

Man, with ease and rest and silence and returning to the Earth.

Kib giveth but toil and trouble; and Sish, he sendeth regrets with

each of his hours wherewith he assails the World. Yoharneth-Lahai

cometh nigh no more. I can no longer be glad with Limpang-Tung.

When the other gods forsake him a man hath only Mung.”



But Mung said: “Shall a man curse a god?”



And every day and all night long did Yun-Ilara cry aloud: “Ah, now

for the hour of the mourning of many, and the pleasant garlands of

flowers and the tears, and the moist, dark earth. Ah, for repose

down underneath the grass, where the firm feet of the trees grip

hold upon the world, where never shall come the wind that now blows

through my bones, and the rain shall come warm and trickling, not

driven by storm, where is the easeful falling asunder of bone from

bone in the dark.” Thus prayed Yun-Ilara, who had cursed in his

folly and youth, while never heeded Mung.



Still from a heap of bones that are Yun-Ilara still, lying about

the ruined base of the tower that once he builded, goes up a

shrill voice with the wind crying out for the mercy of Mung, if

any such there be.









OF HOW THE GODS WHELMED SIDITH





There was dole in the valley of Sidith. For three years there had

been pestilence, and in the last of the three a famine; moreover,

there was imminence of war.



Throughout all Sidith men died night and day, and night and day

within the Temple of All the gods save One (for none may pray to

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI) did the priests of the gods pray hard.



For they said: “For a long while a man may hear the droning of

little insects and yet not be aware that he hath heard them, so

may the gods not hear our prayers at first until they have been

very oft repeated. But when your praying has troubled the silence

long it may be that some god as he strolls in Pegana’s glades may

come on one of our lost prayers, that flutters like a butterfly

tossed in storm when all its wings are broken; then if the gods be

merciful they may ease our fears in Sidith, or else they may crush

us, being petulant gods, and so we shall see trouble in Sidith no

longer, with its pestilence and dearth and fears of war.”



But in the fourth year of the pestilence and in the second year

of the famine, and while still there was imminence of war, came

all the people of Sidith to the door of the Temple of All the gods

save One, where none may enter but the priests--but only leave

gifts and go.



And there the people cried out: “O High Prophet of All the gods

save One, Priest of Kib, Priest of Sish, and Priest of Mung,

Teller of the mysteries of Dorozhand, Receiver of the gifts of the

People, and Lord of Prayer, what doest thou within the Temple of

All the gods save One?”



And Arb-Rin-Hadith, who was the High Prophet, answered: “I pray for

all the People.”



But the people answered: “O High Prophet of All the gods save One,

Priest of Kib, Priest of Sish, and Priest of Mung, Teller of the

mysteries of Dorozhand, Receiver of the gifts of the People, and

Lord of Prayer, for four long years hast thou prayed with the

priests of all thine order, while we brought ye gifts and died.

Now, therefore, since They have not heard thee in four grim years,

thou must go and carry to Their faces the prayer of the people of

Sidith when They go to drive the thunder to his pasture upon the

mountain Aghrinaun, or else there shall no longer be gifts upon

thy temple door, whenever falls the dew, that thou and thine order

may fatten.



“Then thou shalt say before Their faces: ‘O All the gods save One,

Lords of the Worlds, whose child is the eclipse, take back thy

pestilence from Sidith, for ye have played the game of the gods

too long with the people of Sidith, who would fain have done with

the gods’.”



Then in great fear answered the High Prophet, saying: “What if the

gods be angry and whelm Sidith?” And the people answered: “Then are

we sooner done with pestilence and famine and the imminence of war.”



That night the thunder howled upon Aghrinaun, which stood a peak above

all others in the land of Sidith. And the people took Arb-Rin-Hadith

from his Temple and drave him to Aghrinaun, for they said: “There walk

to-night upon the mountain All the gods save One.”



And Arb-Rin-Hadith went trembling to the gods.



Next morning, white and frightened from Aghrinaun, came Arb-Rin-Hadith

back into the valley, and there spake to the people, saying: “The

faces of the gods are iron and their mouths set hard. There is no

hope from the gods.”



Then said the people: “Thou shalt go to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, to whom

no man may pray: seek him upon Aghrinaun where it lifts clear into

the stillness before morning, and on its summit, where all things

seem to rest surely there rests also MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI. Go to him,

and say: ‘Thou hast made evil gods, and They smite Sidith.’

Perchance he hath forgotten all his gods, or hath not heard of

Sidith. Thou hast escaped the thunder of the gods, surely thou

shalt also escape the stillness of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.”



Upon a morning when the sky and lakes were clear and the world

still, and Aghrinaun was stiller than the world, Arb-Rin-Hadith

crept in fear towards the slopes of Aghrinaun because the people

were urgent.



All that day men saw him climbing. At night he rested near the

top. But ere the morning of the day that followed, such as rose

early saw him in the silence, a speck against the blue, stretch up

his arms upon the summit to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI. Then instantly they

saw him not, nor was he ever seen of men again who had dared to

trouble the stillness of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



Such as now speak of Sidith tell of a fierce and potent tribe

that smote away a people in a valley enfeebled by pestilence,

where stood a temple to “All the gods save One” in which was no

high priest.









OF HOW IMBAUN BECAME HIGH PROPHET IN ARADEC OF ALL

THE GODS SAVE ONE





Imbaun was to be made High Prophet in Aradec, of All the Gods save

One.



From Ardra, Rhoodra, and the lands beyond came all High Prophets

of the Earth to the Temple in Aradec of All the gods save One.



And then they told Imbaun how The Secret of Things was upon the

summit of the dome of the Hall of Night, but faintly writ, and in

an unknown tongue.



Midway in the night, between the setting and the rising sun, they

led Imbaun into the Hall of Night, and said to him, chaunting

altogether: “Imbaun, Imbaun, Imbaun, look up to the roof, where is

writ The Secret of Things, but faintly, and in an unknown tongue.”



And Imbaun looked up, but darkness was so deep within the Hall of

Night that Imbaun saw not even the High Prophets who came from

Ardra, Rhoodra, and the lands beyond, nor saw he aught in the Hall

of Night at all.



Then called the High Prophets: “What seest thou, Imbaun?”



And Imbaun said: “I see naught.”



Then called the High Prophets: “What knowest thou Imbaun?”



And Imbaun said: “I know naught.”



Then spake the High Prophet of Eld of All the gods save One, who

is first on Earth of prophets: “O Imbaun! we have all looked

upwards in the Hall of Night towards the secret of Things, and

ever it was dark, and the Secret faint and in an unknown tongue.

And now thou knowest what all High Prophets know.”



And Imbaun answered: “I know.”



So Imbaun became High Prophet in Aradec of All the gods save One,

and prayed for all the people, who knew not that there was

darkness in the Hall of Night or that the secret was writ faint

and in an unknown tongue.



These are the words of Imbaun that he wrote in a book that all the

people might know:



“In the twentieth night of the nine hundredth moon, as night came

up the valley, I performed the mystic rites of each of the gods in

the temple as is my wont, lest any of the gods should grow angry

in the night and whelm us while we slept.



“And as I uttered the last of certain secret words I fell asleep

in the temple, for I was weary, with my head against the altar of

Dorozhand. Then in the stillness, as I slept, there entered

Dorozhand by the temple door in the guise of a man, and touched me

on the shoulder, and I awoke.



“But when I saw that his eyes shone blue and lit the whole of the

temple I knew that he was a god though he came in mortal guise.

And Dorozhand said: ‘Prophet of Dorozhand, behold that the people

may know.’ And he showed me the paths of Sish stretching far down

into the future time. Then he bade me arise and follow whither he

pointed, speaking no words but commanding with his eyes.



“Therefore upon the twentieth night of the nine hundredth moon I

walked with Dorozhand adown the paths of Sish into the future

time.



“And ever beside the way did men slay men. And the sum of their

slaying was greater than the slaying of the pestilence of any of

the evils of the gods.



“And cities arose and shed their houses in dust, and ever the

desert returned again to its own, and covered over and hid the

last of all that had troubled its repose.



“And still men slew men.



“And I came at last to a time when men set their yoke no longer

upon beasts but made them beasts of iron.



“And after that did men slay men with mists.



“Then, because the slaying exceeded their desire, there came peace

upon the world that was brought by the hand of the slayer, and men

slew men no more.



“And cities multiplied, and overthrew the desert and conquered its

repose.



“And suddenly I beheld that THE END was near, for there was a

stirring above Pegana as of One who grows weary of resting, and I

saw the hound Time crouch to spring, with his eyes upon the

throats of the gods, shifting from throat to throat, and the

drumming of Skarl grew faint.



“And if a god may fear, it seemed that there was fear upon the

face of Dorozhand, and he seized me by the hand and led me back

along the paths of Time that I might not see THE END.



“Then I saw cities rise out of the dust again and fall back into

the desert whence they had arisen; and again I slept in the Temple

of All the gods save One, with my head against the altar of

Dorozhand.



“Then again the Temple was alight, but not with light from the

eyes of Dorozhand; only dawn came all blue out of the East and

shone through the arches of the Temple. Then I awoke and performed

the morning rites and mysteries of All the gods save One, lest any

of the gods be angry in the day and take away the Sun.



“And I knew that because I who had been so near to it had not

beheld THE END that a man should never behold it or know the doom

of the gods. This They have hidden.”









OF HOW IMBAUN MET ZODRAK





The prophet of the gods lay resting by the river to watch the

stream run by.



And as he lay he pondered on the Scheme of Things and the works of

all the gods. And it seemed to the prophet of the gods as he

watched the stream run by that the Scheme was a right scheme and

the gods benignant gods; yet there was sorrow in the Worlds. It

seemed that Kib was bountiful, that Mung calmed all who suffer,

that Sish dealt not too harshly with the hours, and that all the

gods were good; yet there was sorrow in the Worlds.



Then said the prophet of the gods as he watched the stream run by:

“There is some other god of whom naught is writ.” And suddenly the

prophet was aware of an old man who bemoaned beside the river,

crying: “Alas! alas!”



His face was marked by the sign and the seal of exceeding many

years, and there was yet vigour in his frame. These be the words

of the prophet that he wrote in his book: “I said: ‘Who art thou

that bemoans beside the river?’ And he answered: ‘I am the fool.’

I said: ‘Upon thy brow are the marks of wisdom such as is stored

in books.’ He said: ‘I am Zodrak. Thousands of years ago I tended

sheep upon a hill that sloped towards the sea. The gods have many

moods. Thousands of years ago They were in a mirthful mood. They

said: ‘Let Us call up a man before Us that We may laugh in

Pegana.’”



“‘And Their eyes that looked on me saw not me alone but also saw

THE BEGINNING and THE END and all the Worlds besides. Then said

the gods, speaking as speak the gods: “Go, back to thy sheep.”



“‘But I, who am the fool, had heard it said on earth that whoso

seeth the gods upon Pegana becometh as the gods, if so he demand

to Their faces, who may not slay him who hath looked them in the

eyes.



“‘And I, the fool, said: “I have looked in the eyes of the gods,

and I demand what a man may demand of the gods when he hath seen

Them in Pegana.” And the gods inclined Their heads and Hoodrazai

said: “It is the law of the gods.”



“‘And I, who was only a shepherd, how could I know?



“‘I said: “I will make men rich.” And the gods said: “What is

rich?”



“‘And I said: “I will send them love.” And the gods said: “What is

love?” And I sent gold into the Worlds, and, alas! I sent with it

poverty and strife. And I sent love into the Worlds, and with it

grief.



“‘And now I have mixed gold and love most woefully together, and I

can never remedy what I have done, for the deeds of the gods are

done, and nothing may undo them.



“‘Then I said: “I will give men wisdom that they may be glad.” And

those who got my wisdom found that they knew nothing, and from

having been happy became glad no more.



“‘And I, who would make men happy, have made them sad, and I have

spoiled the beautiful scheme of the gods.



“‘And now my hand is for ever on the handle of Their plough. I was

only a shepherd, and how should I have known?



“‘Now I come to thee as thou restest by the river to ask of thee

thy forgiveness, for I would fain have the forgiveness of a man.’



“And I answered: ‘O Lord of seven skies, whose children are the

storms, shall a man forgive a god?’



“He answered: ‘Men have sinned not against the gods as the gods

have sinned against men since I came into Their councils.’



“And I, the prophet, answered: ‘O Lord of seven skies, whose

plaything is the thunder, thou art amongst the gods, what need

hast thou for words from any man?’



“He said: ‘Indeed I am amongst the gods, who speak to me as they

speak to other gods, yet is there always a smile about Their

mouths, and a look in Their eyes that saith: “Thou wert a man.”’



“I said: ‘O Lord of seven skies, about whose feet the Worlds are

as drifted sand, because thou biddest me, I, a man, forgive thee.’



“And he answered: ‘I was but a shepherd, and I could not know.’

Then he was gone.”









PEGANA





The prophet of the gods cried out to the gods: “O! All the gods

save One” for none may pray to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, “where shall the

life of a man abide when Mung hath made against his body the sign

of Mung?--for the people with whom ye play have sought to know.”



But the gods answered, speaking through the mist:



“Though thou shouldst tell thy secrets to the beasts, even that

the beasts should understand, yet will not the gods divulge the

secret of the gods to thee, that gods and beasts and men shall be

all the same, all knowing the same things.”



That night Yoharneth-Lahai came to Aradec, and said unto Imbaun:

“Wherefore wouldst thou know the secret of the gods that not the

gods may tell thee?



“When the wind blows not, where, then, is the wind?



“Or when thou art not living, where art thou?



“What should the wind care for the hours of calm or thou for

death?



“Thy life is long, Eternity is short.



“So short that, shouldst thou die and Eternity should pass, and

after the passing of Eternity thou shouldst live again, thou

wouldst say: ‘I closed mine eyes but for an instant.’



“There is an eternity behind thee as well as one before. Hast thou

bewailed the aeons that passed without thee, who art so much

afraid of the aeons that shall pass?”



Then said the prophet: “How shall I tell the people that the gods

have not spoken and their prophet doth not know? For then should I

be prophet no longer, and another would take the people’s gifts

instead of me.”



Then said Imbaun to the people: “The gods have spoken, saying: ‘O

Imbaun, Our prophet, it is as the people believe whose wisdom hath

discovered the secret of the gods, and the people when they die

shall come to Pegana, and there live with the gods, and there have

pleasure without toil. And Pegana is a place all white with the

peaks of mountains, on each of them a god, and the people shall

lie upon the slopes of the mountains each under the god that he

hath worshipped most when his lot was in the Worlds. And there

shall music beyond thy dreaming come drifting through the scent

of all the orchards in the Worlds, with somewhere someone singing

an old song that shall be as a half-remembered thing. And there

shall be gardens that have always sunlight, and streams that are

lost in no sea beneath skies for ever blue. And there shall be no

rain nor no regrets. Only the roses that in highest Pegana have

achieved their prime shall shed their petals in showers at thy

feet, and only far away on the forgotten earth shall voices drift

up to thee that cheered thee in thy childhood about the gardens of

thy youth. And if thou sighest for any memory of earth because thou

hearest unforgotten voices, then will the gods send messengers on

wings to soothe thee in Pegana, saying to them: “There one sigheth

who hath remembered Earth.” And they shall make Pegana more seductive

for thee still, and they shall take thee by the hand and whisper in

thine ear till the old voices are forgot.



“‘And besides the flowers of Pegana there shall have climbed by

then until it hath reached to Pegana the rose that clambered about

the house where thou wast born. Thither shall also come the

wandering echoes of all such music as charmed thee long ago.



“‘Moreover, as thou sittest on the orchard lawns that clothe

Pegana’s mountains, and as thou hearkenest to melody that sways

the souls of the gods, there shall stretch away far down beneath

thee the great unhappy Earth, till gazing from rapture upon sorrows

thou shalt be glad that thou wert dead.



“‘And from the three great mountains that stand aloof and over all

the others--Grimbol, Zeebol, and Trehagobol--shall blow the wind

of the morning and the wind of all the day, borne upon the wings

of all the butterflies that have died upon the Worlds, to cool the

gods and Pegana.



“‘Far through Pegana a silvery fountain, lured upward by the gods

from the Central Sea, shall fling its waters aloft, and over the

highest of Pegana’s peaks, above Trehagobol, shall burst into

gleaming mists, to cover Highest Pegana, and make a curtain about

the resting-place of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



“‘Alone, still and remote below the base of one of the inner

mountains, lieth a great blue pool.



“‘Whoever looketh down into its waters may behold all his life

that was upon the Worlds and all the deeds that he hath done.



“‘None walk by the pool and none regard its depths, for all in

Pegana have suffered and all have sinned some sin, and it lieth in

the pool.



“‘And there is no darkness in Pegana, for when night hath conquered the

sun and stilled the Worlds and turned the white peaks of Pegana into

grey then shine the blue eyes of the gods like sunlight on the sea,

where each god sits upon his mountain.



“‘And at the Last, upon some afternoon, perhaps in summer, shall

the gods say, speaking to the gods: “What is the likeness of

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI and what THE END?”



“‘And then shall MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI draw back with his hand the mists

that cover his resting, saying: “This is the Face of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI

and this THE END.”’”



Then said the people to the prophet: “Shall not black hills draw

round in some forsaken land, to make a vale-wide cauldron wherein

the molten rock shall seethe and roar, and where the crags of

mountains shall be hurled upward to the surface and bubble and go

down again, that there our enemies may boil for ever?”



And the prophet answered: “It is writ large about the bases of

Pegana’s mountains, upon which sit the gods: ‘Thine Enemies Are

Forgiven.”’









THE SAYINGS OF IMBAUN





The Prophet of the gods said: “Yonder beside the road there

sitteth a false prophet; and to all who seek to know the hidden

days he saith: ‘Upon the morrow the King shall speak to thee as

his chariot goeth by.’”



Moreover, all the people bring him gifts, and the false prophet

hath more to listen to his words than hath the Prophet of the

gods.



Then said Imbaun: “What knoweth the Prophet of the gods? I know

only that I and men know naught concerning the gods or aught

concerning men. Shall I, who am their prophet, tell the people

this?



“For wherefore have the people chosen prophets but that they

should speak the hopes of the people, and tell the people that

their hopes be true?”



The false prophet saith: “Upon the morrow the king shall speak to

thee.”



Shall not I say: “Upon The Morrow the gods shall speak with thee

as thou restest upon Pegana?”



So shall the people be happy, and know that their hopes be true

who have believed the words that they have chosen a prophet to say.



But what shall know the Prophet of the gods, to whom none may come

to say: “Thy hopes are true,” for whom none may make strange signs

before his eyes to quench his fear of death, for whom alone the

chaunt of his priests availeth naught?



The Prophet of the gods hath sold his happiness for wisdom, and

hath given his hopes for the people.



Said also Imbaun: “When thou art angry at night observe how calm

be the stars; and shall small ones rail when there is such a calm

among the great ones? Or when thou art angry by day regard the

distant hills, and see the calm that doth adorn their faces. Shalt

thou be angry while they stand so serene?



“Be not angry with men, for they are driven as thou art by

Dorozhand. Do bullocks goad one another on whom the same yoke

rests?



“And be not angry with Dorozhand, for then thou beatest thy bare

fingers against iron cliffs.



“All that is is so because it was to be. Rail not, therefore,

against what is, for it was all to be.”



And Imbaun said: “The Sun ariseth and maketh a glory about all the

things that he seeth, and drop by drop he turneth the common dew

to every kind of gem. And he maketh a splendour in the hills.



“And also man is born. And there rests a glory about the gardens

of his youth. Both travel afar to do what Dorozhand would have

them do.



“Soon now the sun will set, and very softly come twinkling in the

stillness all the stars.



“Also man dieth. And quietly about his grave will all the mourners

weep.



“Will not his life arise again somewhere in all the worlds? Shall

he not again behold the gardens of his youth? Or does he set to

end?”









OF HOW IMBAUN SPAKE OF DEATH TO THE KING





There trod such pestilence in Aradec that, the King as he looked

abroad out of his palace saw men die. And when the King saw Death

he feared that one day even the King should die. Therefore he

commanded guards to bring before him the wisest prophet that

should be found in Aradec.



Then heralds came to the temple of All the gods save One, and

cried aloud, having first commanded silence, crying: “Rhazahan,

King over Aradec, Prince by right of Ildun and Ildaun, and Prince

by conquest of Pathia, Ezek, and Azhan, Lord of the Hills, to the

High Prophet of All the gods save One sends salutations.”



Then they bore him before the King.



The King said unto the prophet: “O Prophet of All the gods save

One, shall I indeed die?”



And the prophet answered: “O King! thy people may not rejoice for

ever, and some day the King will die.”



And the King answered: “This may be so, but certainly thou shalt

die. It may be that one day I shall die, but till then the lives

of the people are in my hands.”



Then guards led the prophet away.



And there arose prophets in Aradec who spake not of death to

Kings.









OF OOD





Men say that if thou comest to Sundari, beyond all the plains, and

shalt climb to his summit before thou art seized by the avalanche

which sitteth always on his slopes, that then there lie before thee

many peaks. And if thou shalt climb these and cross their valleys

(of which there be seven and also seven peaks) thou shalt come at

last to the land of forgotten hills, where amid many valleys and

white snow there standeth the “Great Temple of One god Only.”



Therein is a dreaming prophet who doeth naught, and a drowsy

priesthood about him.



These be the priests of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.



Within the temple it is forbidden to work, also it is forbidden to

pray. Night differeth not from day within its doors. They rest as

MANA rests. And the name of their prophet is Ood.



Ood is a greater prophet than any of all the prophets of Earth,

and it hath been said by some that were Ood and his priests to

pray chaunting all together and calling upon MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI

that MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI would then awake, for surely he would hear

the prayers of his own prophet--then would there be Worlds no more.



There is also another way to the land of forgotten hills, which is

a smooth road and a straight, that lies through the heart of the

mountains. But for certain hidden reasons it were better for thee

to go by the peaks and snow, even though thou shouldst perish by

the way, that thou shouldst seek to come to the house of Ood by

the smooth, straight road.









THE RIVER





There arises a river in Pegana that is neither a river of water

nor yet a river of fire, and it flows through the skies and the

Worlds to the Rim of the Worlds, a river of silence. Through all

the Worlds are sounds, the noises of moving, and the echoes of

voices and song; but upon the River is no sound ever heard, for

there all echoes die.



The River arises out of the drumming of Skarl, and flows for ever

between banks of thunder, until it comes to the waste beyond the

Worlds, behind the farthest star, down to the Sea of Silence.



I lay in the desert beyond all cities and sounds, and above me

flowed the River of Silence through the sky; and on the desert’s

edge night fought against the Sun, and suddenly conquered.



Then on the River I saw the dream-built ship of the god Yoharneth-Lahai,

whose great prow lifted grey into the air above the River of Silence.



Her timbers were olden dreams dreamed long ago, and poets’ fancies

made her tall, straight masts, and her rigging was wrought out of

the people’s hopes.



Upon her deck were rowers with dream-made oars, and the rowers

were the people of men’s fancies, and princes of old story and

people who had died, and people who had never been.



These swung forward and swung back to row Yoharneth-Lahai through

the Worlds with never a sound of rowing. For ever on every wind

float up to Pegana the hopes and the fancies of the people which

have no home in the Worlds, and there Yoharneth-Lahai weaves them

into dreams, to take them to the people again.



And every night in his dream-built ship Yoharneth-Lahai setteth

forth, with all his dreams on board, to take again their old hopes

back to the people and all forgotten fancies.



But ere the day comes back to her own again, and all the

conquering armies of the dawn hurl their red lances in the face of

the night, Yoharneth-Lahai leaves the sleeping Worlds, and rows

back up the River of Silence, that flows from Pegana into the Sea

of Silence that lies beyond the Worlds.



And the name of the River is Imrana the River of Silence. All they

that be weary of the sound of cities and very tired of clamour

creep down in the night-time to Yoharneth-Lahai’s ship, and going

aboard it, among the dreams and the fancies of old times, lie down

upon the deck, and pass from sleeping to the River, while Mung,

behind them, makes the sign of Mung because they would have it so.

And, lying there upon the deck among their own remembered fancies,

and songs that were never sung, and they drift up Imrana ere the

dawn, where the sound of the cities comes not, nor the voice of

the thunder is heard, nor the midnight howl of Pain as he gnaws

at the bodies of men, and far away and forgotten bleat the small

sorrows that trouble all the Worlds.



But where the River flows through Pegana’s gates, between the

great twin constellations Yum and Gothum, where Yum stands

sentinel upon the left and Gothum upon the right, there sits

Sirami, the lord of All Forgetting. And, when the ship draws near,

Sirami looketh with his sapphire eyes into the faces and beyond

them of those that were weary of cities, and as he gazes, as one

that looketh before him remembering naught, he gently waves his

hands. And amid the waving of Sirami’s hands there fall from all

that behold him all their memories, save certain things that may

not be forgotten even beyond the Worlds.



It hath been said that when Skarl ceases to drum, and MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI

awakes, and the gods of Pegana know that it is THE END, that then the

gods will enter galleons of gold, and with dream-born rowers glide down

Imrana (who knows whither or why?) till they come where the River enters

the Silent Sea, and shall there be gods of nothing, where nothing is,

and never a sound shall come. And far away upon the River’s banks shall

bay their old hound Time, that shall seek to rend his masters; while

MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI shall think some other plan concerning gods and worlds.









THE BIRD OF DOOM AND THE END





For at the last shall the thunder, fleeing to escape from the doom

of the gods, roar horribly among the Worlds; and Time, the hound

of the gods, shall bay hungrily at his masters because he is lean

with age.



And from the innermost of Pegana’s vales shall the bird of doom,

Mosahn, whose voice is like the trumpet, soar upward with

boisterous beatings of his wings above Pegana’s mountains and the

gods, and there with his trumpet voice acclaim THE END.



Then in the tumult and amid the fury of their hound the gods shall

make for the last time in Pegana the sign of all the gods, and go

with dignity and quiet down to Their galleons of gold, and sail

away down the River of Silence, not ever to return.



Then shall the River overflow its banks, and a tide come setting

in from the Silent Sea, till all the Worlds and the Skies are

drowned in silence; while MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI in the Middle of All

sits deep in thought. And the hound Time, when all the Worlds and

cities are swept away whereon he used to raven, having no more to

devour, shall suddenly die.



But there are some that hold--and this is the heresy of the

Saigoths--that when the gods go down at the last into their

galleons of gold Mung shall turn alone, and, setting his back

against Trehagobol and wielding the Sword of Severing which is

called Death, shall fight out his last fight with the hound Time,

his empty scabbard Sleep clattering loose beside him.



There under Trehagobol they shall fight alone when all the gods

are gone.



And the Saigoths say that for two days and nights the hound shall

leer and snarl before the face of Mung-days and nights that shall

be lit by neither sun nor moons, for these shall go dipping down

the sky with all the Worlds as the galleons glide away, because

the gods that made them are gods no more.



And then shall the hound, springing, tear out the throat of Mung,

who, making for the last time the sign of Mung, shall bring down

Death crashing through the shoulders of the hound, and in the

blood of Time that Sword shall rust away.



Then shall MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI be all alone, with neither Death nor

Time, and never the hours singing in his ears, nor the swish of

the passing lives.



But far away from Pegana shall go the galleons of gold that bear

the gods away, upon whose faces shall be utter calm, because They

are the gods knowing that it is THE END.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GODS OF PEGANA ***



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will

be renamed.



Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright

law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the

United States without permission and without paying copyright

royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™

concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for

copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very

easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation

of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project

Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may

do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected

by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark

license, especially commercial redistribution.



START: FULL LICENSE



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK



To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free

distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work

(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project

Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full

Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at

www.gutenberg.org/license.



Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works



1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™

electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to

and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property

(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all

the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or

destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your

possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a

Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound

by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the

person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph

1.E.8.



1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be

used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who

agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few

things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See

paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this

agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™

electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.



1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the

Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection

of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual

works in the collection are in the public domain in the United

States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the

United States and you are located in the United States, we do not

claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,

displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as

all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope

that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting

free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™

works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the

Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily

comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the

same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when

you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern

what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are

in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,

check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this

agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,

distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any

other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no

representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any

country other than the United States.



1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:



1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other

immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear

prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work

on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the

phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,

performed, viewed, copied or distributed:



  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no

  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it

  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this

  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the

  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where

  you are located before using this eBook.



1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is

derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not

contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the

copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in

the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are

redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project

Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply

either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or

obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™

trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted

with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution

must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any

additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms

will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works

posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the

beginning of this work.



1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™

License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.



1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this

electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without

prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with

active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project

Gutenberg™ License.



1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including

any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access

to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format

other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official

version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website

(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense

to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means

of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain

Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the

full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.



1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works

unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

provided that:



• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from

  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method

  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed

  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has

  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project

  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid

  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are

  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty

  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project

  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg

  Literary Archive Foundation.”



• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies

  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he

  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™

  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all

  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue

  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™

  works.



• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of

  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the

  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of

  receipt of the work.



• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free

  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.



1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project

Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than

are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing

from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of

the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set

forth in Section 3 below.



1.F.



1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable

effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread

works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project

Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™

electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may

contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate

or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other

intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or

other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or

cannot be read by your equipment.



1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right

of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project

Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project

Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal

fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT

LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE

PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE

TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE

LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR

INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH

DAMAGE.



1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a

defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can

receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a

written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you

received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium

with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you

with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in

lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person

or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second

opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If

the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing

without further opportunities to fix the problem.



1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO

OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT

LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.



1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied

warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of

damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement

violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the

agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or

limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or

unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the

remaining provisions.



1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the

trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone

providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in

accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the

production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™

electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,

including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of

the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this

or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or

additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any

Defect you cause.



Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™



Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of

computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It

exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations

from people in all walks of life.



Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the

assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s

goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will

remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure

and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future

generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see

Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at

www.gutenberg.org.



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit

501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the

state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal

Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification

number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by

U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.



The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,

Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up

to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website

and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact.



Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation



Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without

widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of

increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be

freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest

array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations

($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt

status with the IRS.



The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating

charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United

States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a

considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up

with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations

where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND

DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular

state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.



While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we

have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition

against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who

approach us with offers to donate.



International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from

outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.



Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation

methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other

ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To

donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.



Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic

works



Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project

Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be

freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and

distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of

volunteer support.



Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed

editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in

the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not

necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper

edition.



Most people start at our website which has the main PG search

facility: www.gutenberg.org.



This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,

including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to

subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.





﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Time and the Gods, by Lord Dunsany



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions

whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms

of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at

www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you

will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before

using this eBook.



Title: Time and the Gods



Author: Lord Dunsany [Edward J. M. D. Plunkett]



Release Date: June 27, 2003 [eBook #8183]

[Most recently updated: December 23, 2022]



Language: English



Character set encoding: UTF-8



Produced by: Joris Van Dael, Jerry Fairbanks, Suzanne L. Shell, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIME AND THE GODS ***



[Illustration]









TIME AND THE GODS



by Lord Dunsany





_With Nine Full-Page Illustrations by_

S. H. SIME



LONDON

WILLIAM HEINEMANN

1906





Contents



 Preface

 Part I:

 Time and the Gods

 The Coming of the Sea

 A Legend of the Dawn

 The Vengeance of Men

 When the Gods Slept

 The King That Was Not

 The Cave of Kai

 The Sorrow of Search

 The Men of Yarnith

 For the Honour of the Gods

 Night and Morning

 Usury

 Mlideen

 The Secret of the Gods

 The South Wind

 In the Land of Time

 The Relenting of Sarnidac

 The Jest of the Gods

 The Dreams of the Prophet

 Part II:

 The Journey of the King





List of Illustrations



 Inzana calls up the Thunder

 Kai Laughed

 Departure of Hothrun Dath

 Lo! The Gods

 The Opulence of Yahn

 “Yazun is God”

 The Tomb of Morning Zai

 The Dirge of Shimono Kani

 Pattering Leaves Danced









PREFACE





These tales are of the things that befell gods and men in Yarnith,

Averon, and Zarkandhu, and in the other countries of my dreams.









PART I.









TIME AND THE GODS





Once when the gods were young and only Their swarthy servant Time was

without age, the gods lay sleeping by a broad river upon earth. There

in a valley that from all the earth the gods had set apart for Their

repose the gods dreamed marble dreams. And with domes and pinnacles the

dreams arose and stood up proudly between the river and the sky, all

shimmering white to the morning. In the city’s midst the gleaming

marble of a thousand steps climbed to the citadel where arose four

pinnacles beckoning to heaven, and midmost between the pinnacles there

stood the dome, vast, as the gods had dreamed it. All around, terrace

by terrace, there went marble lawns well guarded by onyx lions and

carved with effigies of all the gods striding amid the symbols of the

worlds. With a sound like tinkling bells, far off in a land of

shepherds hidden by some hill, the waters of many fountains turned

again home. Then the gods awoke and there stood Sardathrion. Not to

common men have the gods given to walk Sardathrion’s streets, and not

to common eyes to see her fountains. Only to those to whom in lonely

passes in the night the gods have spoken, leaning through the stars, to

those that have heard the voices of the gods above the morning or seen

Their faces bending above the sea, only to those hath it been given to

see Sardathrion, to stand where her pinnacles gathered together in the

night fresh from the dreams of gods. For round the valley a great

desert lies through which no common traveller may come, but those whom

the gods have chosen feel suddenly a great longing at heart, and

crossing the mountains that divide the desert from the world, set out

across it driven by the gods, till hidden in the desert’s midst they

find the valley at last and look with eyes upon Sardathrion.



In the desert beyond the valley grow a myriad thorns, and all pointing

towards Sardathrion. So may many that the gods have loved come to the

marble city, but none can return, for other cities are no fitting home

for men whose feet have touched Sardathrion’s marble streets, where

even the gods have not been ashamed to come in the guise of men with

Their cloaks wrapped about their faces. Therefore no city shall ever

hear the songs that are sung in the marble citadel by those in whose

ears have rung the voices of the gods. No report shall ever come to

other lands of the music of the fall of Sardathrion’s fountains, when

the waters which went heavenward return again into the lake where the

gods cool Their brows sometimes in the guise of men. None may ever hear

the speech of the poets of that city, to whom the gods have spoken.



It stands a city aloof. There hath been no rumour of it—I alone have

dreamed of it, and I may not be sure that my dreams are true.





Above the Twilight the gods were seated in the after years, ruling the

worlds. No longer now They walked at evening in the Marble City hearing

the fountains splash, or listening to the singing of the men they

loved, because it was in the after years and the work of the gods was

to be done.



But often as they rested a moment from doing the work of the gods, from

hearing the prayers of men or sending here the Pestilence or there

Mercy, They would speak awhile with one another of the olden years

saying, “Rememberest thou not Sardathrion?” and another would answer

“Ah! Sardathrion, and all Sardathrion’s mist-draped marble lawns

whereon we walk not now.”



Then the gods turned to do the work of the gods, answering the prayers

of men or smiting them, and ever They sent Their swarthy servant Time

to heal or overwhelm. And Time went forth into the worlds to obey the

commands of the gods, yet he cast furtive glances at his masters, and

the gods distrusted Time because he had known the worlds or ever the

gods became.



One day when furtive Time had gone into the worlds to nimbly smite some

city whereof the gods were weary, the gods above the twilight speaking

to one another said:



“Surely we are the lords of Time and gods of the worlds besides. See

how our city Sardathrion lifts over other cities. Others arise and

perish but Sardathrion standeth yet, the first and the last of cities.

Rivers are lost in the sea and streams forsake the hills, but ever

Sardathrion’s fountains arise in our dream city. As was Sardathrion

when the gods were young, so are her streets to-day as a sign that we

are the gods.”



Suddenly the swart figure of Time stood up before the gods, with both

hands dripping with blood and a red sword dangling idly from his

fingers, and said:



“Sardathrion is gone! I have overthrown it!”



And the gods said:



“Sardathrion? Sardathrion, the marble city? Thou, thou hast overthrown

it? Thou, the slave of the gods?”



And the oldest of the gods said:



“Sardathrion, Sardathrion, and is Sardathrion gone?”



And furtively Time looked him in the face and edged towards him

fingering with his dripping fingers the hilt of his nimble sword.



Then the gods feared with a new fear that he that had overthrown Their

city would one day slay the gods. And a new cry went wailing through

the Twilight, the lament of the gods for Their dream city, crying:



“Tears may not bring again Sardathrion.



“But this the gods may do who have seen, and seen with unrelenting

eyes, the sorrows of ten thousand worlds—thy gods may weep for thee.



“Tears may not bring again Sardathrion.



“Believe it not, Sardathrion, that ever thy gods sent this doom to

thee; he that hath overthrown thee shall overthrow thy gods.



“How oft when Night came suddenly on Morning playing in the fields of

Twilight did we watch thy pinnacles emerging from the darkness,

Sardathrion, Sardathrion, dream city of the gods, and thine onyx lions

looming limb by limb from the dusk.



“How often have we sent our child the Dawn to play with thy fountain

tops; how often hath Evening, loveliest of our goddesses, strayed long

upon thy balconies.



“Let one fragment of thy marbles stand up above the dust for thine old

gods to caress, as a man when all else is lost treasures one lock of

the hair of his beloved.



“Sardathrion, the gods must kiss once more the place where thy streets

were once.



“There were wonderful marbles in thy streets, Sardathrion.”



“Sardathrion, Sardathrion, the gods weep for thee.”









THE COMING OF THE SEA





Once there was no sea, and the gods went walking over the green plains

of earth.



Upon an evening of the forgotten years the gods were seated on the

hills, and all the little rivers of the world lay coiled at Their feet

asleep, when Slid, the new god, striding through the stars, came

suddenly upon earth lying in a corner of space. And behind Slid there

marched a million waves, all following Slid and tramping up the

twilight; and Slid touched Earth in one of her great green valleys that

divide the south, and here he encamped for the night with all his waves

about him. But to the gods as They sat upon Their hilltops a new cry

came crying over the green spaces that lay below the hills, and the

gods said:



“This is neither the cry of life nor yet the whisper of death. What is

this new cry that the gods have never commanded, yet which comes to the

ears of the gods?”



And the gods together shouting made the cry of the south, calling the

south wind to them. And again the gods shouted all together making the

cry of the north, calling the north wind to Them; and thus They

gathered to Them all Their winds and sent these four down into the low

plains to find what thing it was that called with the new cry, and to

drive it away from the gods.



Then all the winds harnessed up their clouds and drave forth till they

came to the great green valley that divides the south in twain, and

there found Slid with all his waves about him. Then for a space Slid

and the four winds struggled with one another till the strength of the

winds was gone, and they limped back to the gods, their masters, and

said:



“We have met this new thing that has come upon the earth and have

striven against its armies, but could not drive them forth; and the new

thing is beautiful but very angry, and is creeping towards the gods.”



But Slid advanced and led his armies up the valley, and inch by inch

and mile by mile he conquered the lands of the gods. Then from Their

hills the gods sent down a great array of cliffs of hard, red rocks,

and bade them march against Slid. And the cliffs marched down till they

came and stood before Slid and leaned their heads forward and frowned

and stood staunch to guard the lands of the gods against the might of

the sea, shutting Slid off from the world. Then Slid sent some of his

smaller waves to search out what stood against him, and the cliffs

shattered them. But Slid went back and gathered together a hoard of his

greatest waves and hurled them against the cliffs, and the cliffs

shattered them. And again Slid called up out of his deep a mighty array

of waves and sent them roaring against the guardians of the gods, and

the red rocks frowned and smote them. And once again Slid gathered his

greater waves and hurled them against the cliffs; and when the waves

were scattered like those before them the feet of the cliffs were no

longer standing firm, and their faces were scarred and battered. Then

into every cleft that stood in the rocks Slid sent his hugest wave and

others followed behind it, and Slid himself seized hold of huge rocks

with his claws and tore them down and stamped them under his feet. And

when the tumult was over the sea had won, and over the broken remnants

of those red cliffs the armies of Slid marched on and up the long green

valley.



Then the gods heard Slid exulting far away and singing songs of triumph

over Their battered cliffs, and ever the tramp of his armies sounded

nearer and nearer in the listening ears of the gods.



Then the gods called to Their downlands to save Their world from Slid,

and the downlands gathered themselves and marched away, a great white

line of gleaming cliffs, and halted before Slid. Then Slid advanced no

more and lulled his legions, and while his waves were low he softly

crooned a song such as once long ago had troubled the stars and brought

down tears out of the twilight.



Sternly the white cliffs stood on guard to save the world of the gods,

but the song that once had troubled the stars went moaning on awaking

pent desires, till full at the feet of the gods the melody fell. Then

the blue rivers that lay curled asleep opened their gleaming eyes,

uncurled themselves and shook their rushes, and, making a stir among

the hills, crept down to find the sea. And passing across the world

they came at last to where the white cliffs stood, and, coming behind

them, split them here and there and went through their broken ranks to

Slid at last. And the gods were angry with Their traitorous streams.



Then Slid ceased from singing the song that lures the world, and

gathered up his legions, and the rivers lifted up their heads with the

waves, and all went marching on to assail the cliffs of the gods. And

wherever the rivers had broken the ranks of the cliffs, Slid’s armies

went surging in and broke them up into islands and shattered the

islands away. And the gods on Their hill-tops heard once more the voice

of Slid exulting over Their cliffs.



Already more than half the world lay subject to Slid, and still his

armies advanced; and the people of Slid, the fishes and the long eels,

went in and out of arbours that once were dear to the gods. Then the

gods feared for Their dominion, and to the innermost sacred recesses of

the mountains, to the very heart of the hills, the gods trooped off

together and there found Tintaggon, a mountain of black marble, staring

far over the earth, and spake thus to him with the voices of the gods:



“O eldest born of our mountains, when first we devised the earth we

made thee, and thereafter fashioned fields and hollows, valleys and

other hills, to lie about thy feet. And now, Tintaggon, thine ancient

lords, the gods, are facing a new thing which overthrows the old. Go

therefore, thou, Tintaggon, and stand up against Slid, that the gods be

still the gods and the earth still green.”



And hearing the voices of his sires, the elder gods, Tintaggon strode

down through the evening, leaving a wake of twilight broad behind him

as he strode: and going across the green earth came down to Ambrady at

the valley’s edge, and there met the foremost of Slid’s fierce armies

conquering the world.



And against him Slid hurled the force of a whole bay, which lashed

itself high over Tintaggon’s knees and streamed around his flanks and

then fell and was lost. Tintaggon still stood firm for the honour and

dominion of his lords, the elder gods. Then Slid went to Tintaggon and

said: “Let us now make a truce. Stand thou back from Ambrady and let me

pass through thy ranks that mine armies may now pass up the valley

which opens on the world, that the green earth that dreams around the

feet of older gods shall know the new god Slid. Then shall mine armies

strive with thee no more, and thou and I shall be the equal lords of

the whole earth when all the world is singing the chaunt of Slid, and

thy head alone shall be lifted above mine armies when rival hills are

dead. And I will deck thee with all the robes of the sea, and all the

plunder that I have taken in rare cities shall be piled before thy

feet. Tintaggon, I have conquered all the stars, my song swells through

all the space besides, I come victorious from Mahn and Khanagat on the

furthest edge of the worlds, and thou and I are to be equal lords when

the old gods are gone and the green earth knoweth Slid. Behold me

gleaming azure and fair with a thousand smiles, and swayed by a

thousand moods.” And Tintaggon answered: “I am staunch and black and

have one mood, and this—to defend my masters and their green earth.”



Then Slid went backward growling and summoned together the waves of a

whole sea and sent them singing full in Tintaggon’s face. Then from

Tintaggon’s marble front the sea fell backwards crying on to a broken

shore, and ripple by ripple straggled back to Slid saying: “Tintaggon

stands.”



Far out beyond the battered shore that lay at Tintaggon’s feet Slid

rested long and sent the nautilus to drift up and down before

Tintaggon’s eyes, and he and his armies sat singing idle songs of

dreamy islands far away to the south, and of the still stars whence

they had stolen forth, of twilight evenings and of long ago. Still

Tintaggon stood with his feet planted fair upon the valley’s edge

defending the gods and Their green earth against the sea.



And all the while that Slid sang his songs and played with the nautilus

that sailed up and down he gathered his oceans together. One morning as

Slid sang of old outrageous wars and of most enchanting peace and of

dreamy islands and the south wind and the sun, he suddenly launched

five oceans out of the deep all to attack Tintaggon. And the five

oceans sprang upon Tintaggon and passed above his head. One by one the

grip of the oceans loosened, one by one they fell back into the deep

and still Tintaggon stood, and on that morning the might of all five

oceans lay dead at Tintaggon’s feet. That which Slid had conquered he

still held, and there is now no longer a great green valley in the

south, but all that Tintaggon had guarded against Slid he gave back to

the gods. Very calm the sea lies now about Tintaggon’s feet, where he

stands all black amid crumbled cliffs of white, with red rocks piled

about his feet. And often the sea retreats far out along the shore, and

often wave by wave comes marching in with the sound of the tramping of

armies, that all may still remember the great fight that surged about

Tintaggon once, when he guarded the gods and the green earth against

Slid.



Sometimes in their dreams the war-scarred warriors of Slid still lift

their heads and cry their battle cry; then do dark clouds gather about

Tintaggon’s swarthy brow and he stands out menacing, seen afar by

ships, where once he conquered Slid. And the gods know well that while

Tintaggon stands They and Their world are safe; and whether Slid shall

one day smite Tintaggon is hidden among the secrets of the sea.









A LEGEND OF THE DAWN





When the worlds and All began the gods were stern and old and They saw

the Beginning from under eyebrows hoar with years, all but Inzana,

Their child, who played with the golden ball. Inzana was the child of

all the gods. And the law before the Beginning and thereafter was that

all should obey the gods, yet hither and thither went all Pegāna’s gods

to obey the Dawnchild because she loved to be obeyed.



It was dark all over the world and even in Pegāna, where dwell the

gods, it was dark when the child Inzana, the Dawn, first found her

golden ball. Then running down the stairway of the gods with tripping

feet, chalcedony, onyx, chalcedony, onyx, step by step, she cast her

golden ball across the sky. The golden ball went bounding up the sky,

and the Dawnchild with her flaring hair stood laughing upon the

stairway of the gods, and it was day. So gleaming fields below saw the

first of all the days that the gods have destined. But towards evening

certain mountains, afar and aloof, conspired together to stand between

the world and the golden ball and to wrap their crags about it and to

shut it from the world, and all the world was darkened with their plot.

And the Dawnchild up in Pegāna cried for her golden ball. Then all the

gods came down the stairway right to Pegāna’s gate to see what ailed

the Dawnchild and to ask her why she cried. Then Inzana said that her

golden ball had been taken away and hidden by mountains black and ugly,

far away from Pegāna, all in a world of rocks under the rim of the sky,

and she wanted her golden ball and could not love the dark.



Thereat Umborodom, whose hound was the thunder, took his hound in

leash, and strode away across the sky after the golden ball until he

came to the mountains afar and aloof. There did the thunder put his

nose to the rocks and bay along the valleys, and fast at his heels

followed Umborodom. And the nearer the hound, the thunder, came to the

golden ball the louder did he bay, but haughty and silent stood the

mountains whose plot had darkened the world. All in the dark among the

crags in a mighty cavern, guarded by two twin peaks, at last they found

the golden ball for which the Dawnchild wept. Then under the world went

Umborodom with his thunder panting behind him, and came in the dark

before the morning from underneath the world and gave the Dawnchild

back her golden ball. And Inzana laughed and took it in her hands, and

Umborodom went back into Pegāna, and at its threshold the thunder went

to sleep.



Again the Dawnchild tossed the golden ball far up into the blue across

the sky, and the second morning shone upon the world, on lakes and

oceans, and on drops of dew. But as the ball went bounding on its way,

the prowling mists and the rain conspired together and took it and

wrapped it in their tattered cloaks and carried it away. And through

the rents in their garments gleamed the golden ball, but they held it

fast and carried it right away and underneath the world. Then on an

onyx step Inzana sat down and wept, who could no more be happy without

her golden ball. And again the gods were sorry, and the South Wind came

to tell her tales of most enchanted islands, to whom she listened not,

nor yet to the tales of temples in lone lands that the East Wind told

her, who had stood beside her when she flung her golden ball. But from

far away the West Wind came with news of three grey travellers wrapt

round with battered cloaks that carried away between them a golden

ball.



Then up leapt the North Wind, he who guards the pole, and drew his

sword of ice out of his scabbard of snow and sped away along the road

that leads across the blue. And in the darkness underneath the world he

met the three grey travellers and rushed upon them and drove them far

before him, smiting them with his sword till their grey cloaks streamed

with blood. And out of the midst of them, as they fled with flapping

cloaks all red and grey and tattered, he leapt up with the golden ball

and gave it to the Dawnchild.



Again Inzana tossed the ball into the sky, making the third day, and up

and up it went and fell towards the fields, and as Inzana stooped to

pick it up she suddenly heard the singing of all the birds that were.

All the birds in the world were singing all together and also all the

streams, and Inzana sat and listened and thought of no golden ball, nor

ever of chalcedony and onyx, nor of all her fathers the gods, but only

of all the birds. Then in the woods and meadows where they had all

suddenly sung, they suddenly ceased. And Inzana, looking up, found that

her ball was lost, and all alone in the stillness one owl laughed. When

the gods heard Inzana crying for her ball They clustered together on

the threshold and peered into the dark, but saw no golden ball. And

leaning forward They cried out to the bat as he passed up and down:

“Bat that seest all things, where is the golden ball?”



And though the bat answered none heard. And none of the winds had seen

it nor any of the birds, and there were only the eyes of the gods in

the darkness peering for the golden ball. Then said the gods: “Thou

hast lost thy golden ball,” and They made her a moon of silver to roll

about the sky. And the child cried and threw it upon the stairway and

chipped and broke its edges and asked for the golden ball. And Limpang

Tung, the Lord of Music, who was least of all the gods, because the

child cried still for her golden ball, stole out of Pegāna and crept

across the sky, and found the birds of all the world sitting in trees

and ivy, and whispering in the dark. He asked them one by one for news

of the golden ball. Some had last seen it on a neighbouring hill and

others in trees, though none knew where it was. A heron had seen it

lying in a pond, but a wild duck in some reeds had seen it last as she

came home across the hills, and then it was rolling very far away.



At last the cock cried out that he had seen it lying beneath the world.

There Limpang Tung sought it and the cock called to him through the

darkness as he went, until at last he found the golden ball. Then

Limpang Tung went up into Pegāna and gave it to the Dawnchild, who

played with the moon no more. And the cock and all his tribe cried out:

“We found it. We found the golden ball.”



Again Inzana tossed the ball afar, laughing with joy to see it, her

hands stretched upwards, her golden hair afloat, and carefully she

watched it as it fell. But alas! it fell with a splash into the great

sea and gleamed and shimmered as it fell till the waters became dark

above it and could be seen no more. And men on the world said: “How the

dew has fallen, and how the mists set in with breezes from the

streams.”



But the dew was the tears of the Dawnchild, and the mists were her

sighs when she said: “There will no more come a time when I play with

my ball again, for now it is lost for ever.”



And the gods tried to comfort Inzana as she played with her silver

moon, but she would not hear Them, and went in tears to Slid, where he

played with gleaming sails, and in his mighty treasury turned over gems

and pearls and lorded it over the sea. And she said: “O Slid, whose

soul is in the sea, bring back my golden ball.”



And Slid stood up, swarthy, and clad in seaweed, and mightily dived

from the last chalcedony step out of Pegāna’s threshold straight into

ocean. There on the sand, among the battered navies of the nautilus and

broken weapons of the swordfish, hidden by dark water, he found the

golden ball. And coming up in the night, all green and dripping, he

carried it gleaming to the stairway of the gods and brought it back to

Inzana from the sea; and out of the hands of Slid she took it and

tossed it far and wide over his sails and sea, and far away it shone on

lands that knew not Slid, till it came to its zenith and dropped

towards the world.



But ere it fell the Eclipse dashed out from his hiding, and rushed at

the golden ball and seized it in his jaws. When Inzana saw the Eclipse

bearing her plaything away she cried aloud to the thunder, who burst

from Pegāna and fell howling upon the throat of the Eclipse, who

dropped the golden ball and let it fall towards earth. But the black

mountains disguised themselves with snow, and as the golden ball fell

down towards them they turned their peaks to ruby crimson and their

lakes to sapphires gleaming amongst silver, and Inzana saw a jewelled

casket into which her plaything fell. But when she stooped to pick it

up again she found no jewelled casket with rubies, silver or sapphires,

but only wicked mountains disguised in snow that had trapped her golden

ball. And then she cried because there was none to find it, for the

thunder was far away chasing the Eclipse, and all the gods lamented

when They saw her sorrow. And Limpang Tung, who was least of all the

gods, was yet the saddest at the Dawnchild’s grief, and when the gods

said: “Play with your silver moon,” he stepped lightly from the rest,

and coming down the stairway of the gods, playing an instrument of

music, went out towards the world to find the golden ball because

Inzana wept.





[Illustration: Inzāna calls up the Thunder ]





And into the world he went till he came to the nether cliffs that stand

by the inner mountains in the soul and heart of the earth where the

Earthquake dwelleth alone, asleep but astir as he sleeps, breathing and

moving his legs, and grunting aloud in the dark. Then in the ear of the

Earthquake Limpang Tung said a word that only the gods may say, and the

Earthquake started to his feet and flung the cave away, the cave

wherein he slept between the cliffs, and shook himself and went

galloping abroad and overturned the mountains that hid the golden ball,

and bit the earth beneath them and hurled their crags about and covered

himself with rocks and fallen hills, and went back ravening and

growling into the soul of the earth, and there lay down and slept again

for a hundred years. And the golden ball rolled free, passing under the

shattered earth, and so rolled back to Pegāna; and Limpang Tung came

home to the onyx step and took the Dawnchild by the hand and told not

what he had done but said it was the Earthquake, and went away to sit

at the feet of the gods. But Inzana went and patted the Earthquake on

the head, for she said it was dark and lonely in the soul of the earth.

Thereafter, returning step by step, chalcedony, onyx, chalcedony, onyx,

up the stairway of the gods, she cast again her golden ball from the

Threshold afar into the blue to gladden the world and the sky, and

laughed to see it go.



And far away Trogool upon the utter Rim turned a page that was numbered

six in a cipher that none might read. And as the golden ball went

through the sky to gleam on lands and cities, there came the Fog

towards it, stooping as he walked with his dark brown cloak about him,

and behind him slunk the Night. And as the golden ball rolled past the

Fog suddenly Night snarled and sprang upon it and carried it away.

Hastily Inzana gathered the gods and said: “The Night hath seized my

golden ball and no god alone can find it now, for none can say how far

the Night may roam, who prowls all round us and out beyond the worlds.”



At the entreaty of Their Dawnchild all the gods made Themselves stars

for torches, and far away through all the sky followed the tracks of

Night as far as he prowled abroad. And at one time Slid, with the

Pleiades in his hand, came nigh to the golden ball, and at another

Yoharneth-Lahai, holding Orion for a torch, but lastly Limpang Tung,

bearing the morning star, found the golden ball far away under the

world near to the lair of Night.



And all the gods together seized the ball, and Night turning smote out

the torches of the gods and thereafter slunk away; and all the gods in

triumph marched up the gleaming stairway of the gods, all praising

little Limpang Tung, who through the chase had followed Night so close

in search of the golden ball. Then far below on the world a human child

cried out to the Dawnchild for the golden ball, and Inzana ceased from

her play that illumined world and sky, and cast the ball from the

Threshold of the gods to the little human child that played in the

fields below, and would one day die. And the child played all day long

with the golden ball down in the little fields where the humans lived,

and went to bed at evening and put it beneath his pillow, and went to

sleep, and no one worked in all the world because the child was

playing. And the light of the golden ball streamed up from under the

pillow and out through the half shut door and shone in the western sky,

and Yoharneth-Lahai in the night time tip-toed into the room, and took

the ball gently (for he was a god) away from under the pillow and

brought it back to the Dawnchild to gleam on an onyx step.



But some day Night shall seize the golden ball and carry it right away

and drag it down to his lair, and Slid shall dive from the Threshold

into the sea to see if it be there, and coming up when the fishermen

draw their nets shall find it not, nor yet discover it among the sails.

Limpang Tung shall seek among the birds and shall not find it when the

cock is mute, and up the valleys shall go Umborodom to seek among the

crags. And the hound, the thunder, shall chase the Eclipse and all the

gods go seeking with Their stars, but never find the ball. And men, no

longer having light of the golden ball, shall pray to the gods no more,

who, having no worship, shall be no more the gods.



These things be hidden even from the gods.









THE VENGEANCE OF MEN





Ere the Beginning the gods divided earth into waste and pasture.

Pleasant pastures They made to be green over the face of earth,

orchards They made in valleys and heather upon hills, but Harza They

doomed, predestined and foreordained to be a waste for ever.



When the world prayed at evening to the gods and the gods answered

prayers They forgot the prayers of all the Tribes of Arim. Therefore

the men of Arim were assailed with wars and driven from land to land

and yet would not be crushed. And the men of Arim made them gods for

themselves, appointing men as gods until the gods of Pegāna should

remember them again. And their leaders, Yoth and Haneth, played the

part of gods and led their people on though every tribe assailed them.

At last they came to Harza, where no tribes were, and at last had rest

from war, and Yoth and Haneth said: “The work is done, and surely now

Pegāna’s gods will remember.” And they built a city in Harza and tilled

the soil, and the green came over the waste as the wind comes over the

sea, and there were fruit and cattle in Harza and the sounds of a

million sheep. There they rested from their flight from all the tribes,

and builded fables out of all their sorrows till all men smiled in

Harza and children laughed.



Then said the gods, “Earth is no place for laughter.” Thereat They

strode to Pegāna’s outer gate, to where the Pestilence lay curled

asleep, and waking him up They pointed toward Harza, and the Pestilence

leapt forward howling across the sky.



That night he came to the fields near Harza, and stalking through the

grass sat down and glared at the lights, and licked his paws and glared

at the lights again.



But the next night, unseen, through laughing crowds, the Pestilence

crept into the city, and stealing into the houses one by one, peered

into the people’s eyes, looking even through their eyelids, so that

when morning came men stared before them crying out that they saw the

Pestilence whom others saw not, and thereafter died, because the green

eyes of the Pestilence had looked into their souls. Chill and damp was

he, yet there came heat from his eyes that parched the souls of men.

Then came the physicians and the men learned in magic, and made the

sign of the physicians and the sign of the men of magic and cast blue

water upon herbs and chanted spells; but still the Pestilence crept

from house to house and still he looked into the souls of men. And the

lives of the people streamed away from Harza, and whither they went is

set in many books. But the Pestilence fed on the light that shines in

the eyes of men, which never appeased his hunger; chiller and damper he

grew, and the heat from his eyes increased when night by night he

galloped through the city, going by stealth no more.



Then did men pray in Harza to the gods, saying:



“High gods! Show clemency to Harza.”



And the gods listened to their prayers, but as They listened They

pointed with their fingers and cheered the Pestilence on. And the

Pestilence grew bolder at his masters’ voices and thrust his face close

up before the eyes of men.



He could be seen by none saving those he smote. At first he slept by

day, lying in misty hollows, but as his hunger increased he sprang up

even in sunlight and clung to the chests of men and looked down through

their eyes into their souls that shrivelled, until almost he could be

dimly seen even by those he smote not.



Adro, the physician, sat in his chamber with one light burning, making

a mixing in a bowl that should drive the Pestilence away, when through

his door there blew a draught that set the light a-flickering.



Then because the draught was cold the physician shivered and went and

closed the door, but as he turned again he saw the Pestilence lapping

at his mixing, who sprang and set one paw upon Adro’s shoulder and

another upon his cloak, while with two he clung to his waist, and

looked him in the eyes.



Two men were walking in the street; one said to the other: “Upon the

morrow I will sup with thee.”



And the Pestilence grinned a grin that none beheld, baring his dripping

teeth, and crept away to see whether upon the morrow those men should

sup together.



A traveller coming in said: “This is Harza. Here will I rest.”



But his life went further than Harza upon that day’s journey.



All feared the Pestilence, and those that he smote beheld him, but none

saw the great shapes of the gods by starlight as They urged Their

Pestilence on.



Then all men fled from Harza, and the Pestilence chased dogs and rats

and sprang upward at the bats as they sailed above him, who died and

lay in the streets. But soon he returned and pursued the men of Harza

where they fled, and sat by rivers where they came to drink, away below

the city. Then back to Harza went the people of Harza pursued by the

Pestilence still, and gathered in the Temple of All the gods save One,

and said to the High Prophet: “What may now be done?” who answered:



“All the gods have mocked at prayer. This sin must now be punished by

the vengeance of men.”



And the people stood in awe.



The High Prophet went up to the Tower beneath the sky whereupon beat

the eyes of all the gods by starlight. There in the sight of the gods

he spake in the ear of the gods, saying: “High gods! Ye have made mock

of men. Know therefore that it is writ in ancient lore and found by

prophecy that there is an _End_ that waiteth for the gods, who shall go

down from Pegāna in galleons of gold all down the Silent River and into

the Silent Sea, and there Their galleons shall go up in mist and They

shall be gods no more. And men shall gain harbour from the mocking of

the gods at last in the warm moist earth, but to the gods shall no

ceasing ever come from being the Things that were the gods. When Time

and worlds and death are gone away nought shall then remain but worn

regrets and Things that were once gods.



“In the sight of the gods.



“In the ear of the gods.”



Then the gods shouted all together and pointed with Their hands at the

High Prophet’s throat, and the Pestilence sprang.



Long since the High Prophet is dead and his words are forgotten by men,

but the gods know not yet whether it be true that _The End_ is waiting

for the gods, and him who might have told Them They have slain. And the

gods of Pegāna are fearing the fear that hath fallen upon the gods

because of the vengeance of men, for They know not when _The End_ shall

be, or whether it shall come.









WHEN THE GODS SLEPT





All the gods were sitting in Pegāna, and Their slave, Time, lay idle at

Pegāna’s gate with nothing to destroy, when They thought of worlds,

worlds large and round and gleaming, and little silver moons. Then (who

knoweth when?), as the gods raised Their hands making the sign of the

gods, the thoughts of the gods became worlds and silver moons. And the

worlds swam by Pegāna’s gate to take their places in the sky, to ride

at anchor for ever, each where the gods had bidden. And because they

were round and big and gleamed all over the sky, the gods laughed and

shouted and all clapped Their hands. Then upon earth the gods played

out the game of the gods, the game of life and death, and on the other

worlds They did a secret thing, playing a game that is hidden.



At last They mocked no more at life and laughed at death no more, and

cried aloud in Pegāna: “Will no new thing be? Must those four march for

ever round the world till our eyes are wearied with the treading of the

feet of the Seasons that will not cease, while Night and Day and Life

and Death drearily rise and fall?”



And as a child stares at the bare walls of a narrow hut, so the gods

looked all listlessly upon the worlds, saying:



“Will no new thing be?”



And in Their weariness the gods said: “Ah! to be young again. Ah! to be

fresh once more from the brain of _Mana-Yood-Sushai_.”



And They turned away Their eyes in weariness from all the gleaming

worlds and laid Them down upon Pegāna’s floor, for They said:



“It may be that the worlds shall pass and we would fain forget them.”



Then the gods slept. Then did the comet break loose from his moorings

and the eclipse roamed about the sky, and down on the earth did Death’s

three children—Famine, Pestilence, and Drought—come out to feed. The

eyes of the Famine were green, and the eyes of the Drought were red,

but the Pestilence was blind and smote about all round him with his

claws among the cities.



But as the gods slept, there came from beyond the Rim, out of the dark

and unknown, three Yozis, spirits of ill, that sailed up the river of

Silence in galleons with silver sails. Far away they had seen Yum and

Gothum, the stars that stand sentinel over Pegāna’s gate, blinking and

falling asleep, and as they neared Pegāna they found a hush wherein the

gods slept heavily. Ya, Ha, and Snyrg were these three Yozis, the lords

of evil, madness, and of spite. When they crept from their galleons and

stole over Pegāna’s silent threshold it boded ill for the gods. There

in Pegāna lay the gods asleep, and in a corner lay the Power of the

gods alone upon the floor, a thing wrought of black rock and four words

graven upon it, whereof I might not give thee any clue, if even I

should find it—four words of which none knoweth. Some say they tell of

the opening of a flower towards dawn, and others say they concern

earthquakes among hills, and others that they tell of the death of

fishes, and others that the words be these: Power, Knowledge,

Forgetting, and another word that not the gods themselves may ever

guess. These words the Yozis read, and sped away in dread lest the gods

should wake, and going aboard their galleons, bade the rowers haste.

Thus the Yozis became gods, having the power of gods, and they sailed

away to the earth, and came to a mountainous island in the sea. There

they sat upon the rocks, sitting as the gods sit, with their right

hands uplifted, and having the power of gods, only none came to

worship. Thither came no ships nigh them, nor ever at evening came the

prayers of men, nor smell of incense, nor screams from the sacrifice.

Then said the Yozis:



“Of what avails it that we be gods if no one worship us nor give us

sacrifice?”



And Ya, Ha, and Snyrg set sail in their silver galleons, and went

looming down the sea to come to the shores of men. And first they came

to an island where were fisher folk; and the folk of the island,

running down to the shore cried out to them:



“Who be ye?”



And the Yozis answered:



“We be three gods, and we would have your worship.”



But the fisher folk answered:



“Here we worship Rahm, the Thunder, and have no worship nor sacrifice

for other gods.”



Then the Yozis snarled with anger and sailed away, and sailed till they

came to another shore, sandy and low and forsaken. And at last they

found an old man upon the shore, and they cried out to him:



“Old man upon the shore! We be three gods that it were well to worship,

gods of great power and apt in the granting of prayer.”



The old man answered:



“We worship Pegāna’s gods, who have a fondness for our incense and the

sound of our sacrifice when it squeals upon the altar.”



Then answered Snyrg:



“Asleep are Pegāna’s gods, nor will They wake for the humming of thy

prayers which lie in the dust upon Pegāna’s floor, and over Them

Sniracte, the spider of the worlds, hath woven a web of mist. And the

squealing of the sacrifice maketh no music in ears that are closed in

sleep.”



The old man answered, standing upon the shore:



“Though all the gods of old shall answer our prayers no longer, yet

still to the gods of old shall all men pray here in Syrinais.”



But the Yozis turned their ships about and angrily sailed away, all

cursing Syrinais and Syrinais’s gods, but most especially the old man

that stood upon the shore.



Still the three Yozis lusted for the worship of men, and came, on the

third night of their sailing, to a city’s lights; and nearing the shore

they found it a city of song wherein all folks rejoiced. Then sat each

Yozi on his galleon’s prow, and leered with his eyes upon the city, so

that the music stopped and the dancing ceased, and all looked out to

sea at the strange shapes of the Yozis beneath their silver sails. Then

Snyrg demanded their worship, promising increase of joys, and swearing

by the light of his eyes that he would send little flames to leap over

the grass, to pursue the enemies of that city and to chase them about

the world.



But the people answered that in that city men worshipped Agrodaun, the

mountain standing alone, and might not worship other gods even though

they came in galleons with silver sails, sailing from over the sea. But

Snyrg answered:



“Certainly Agrodaun is only a mountain, and in no manner a god.”



But the priests of Agrodaun sang answer from the shore:



“If the sacrifice of men make not Agrodaun a god, nor blood still young

on his rocks, nor the little fluttering prayers of ten thousand hearts,

nor two thousands years of worship and all the hopes of the people and

the whole strength of our race, then are there no gods and ye be common

sailors, sailing from over the sea.”



Then said the Yozis:



“Hath Agrodaun answered prayer?” And the people heard the words that

the Yozis said.



Then went the priests of Agrodaun away from the shore and up the steep

streets of the city, the people following, and over the moor beyond it

to the foot of Agrodaun, and then said:



“Agrodaun, if thou art not our god, go back and herd with yonder common

hills, and put a cap of snow upon thy head and crouch far off as they

do beneath the sky; but if we have given thee divinity in two thousand

years, if our hopes are all about thee like a cloak, then stand and

look upon thy worshippers from over our city for ever.” And the smoke

that ascended from his feet stood still and there fell a hush over

great Agrodaun; and the priests went back to the sea and said to the

three Yozis:



“New gods shall have our worship when Agrodaun grows weary of being our

god, or when in some night-time he shall stride away, leaving us nought

to gaze at that is higher than our city.”



And the Yozis sailed away and cursed towards Agrodaun, but could not

hurt him, for he was but a mountain.



And the Yozis sailed along the coast till they came to a river running

to the sea, and they sailed up the river till they came to a people at

work, who furrowed the soil and sowed, and strove against the forest.

Then the Yozis called to the people as they worked in the fields:



“Give us your worship and ye shall have many joys.”



But the people answered:



“We may not worship you.”



Then answered Snyrg:



“Ye also, have ye a god?”



And the people answered:



“We worship the years to come, and we set the world in order for their

coming, as one layeth raiment on the road before the advent of a King.

And when those years shall come, they shall accept the worship of a

race they knew not, and their people shall make their sacrifice to the

years that follow them, who, in their turn, shall minister to the

_End_.”



Then answered Snyrg:



“Gods that shall recompense you not. Rather give us your prayers and

have our pleasures, the pleasures that we shall give you, and when your

gods shall come, let them be wroth—they cannot punish you.”



But the people continued to sacrifice their labour to their gods, the

years to come, making the world a place for gods to dwell in, and the

Yozis cursed those gods and sailed away. And Ya, the Lord of malice,

swore that when those years should come, they should see whether it

were well for them to have snatched away the worship from three Yozis.



And still the Yozis sailed, for they said:



“It were better to be birds and have no air to fly in, than to be gods

having neither prayers nor worship.”



But where sky met with ocean, the Yozis saw land again, and thither

sailed; and there the Yozis saw men in strange old garments performing

ancient rites in a land of many temples. And the Yozis called to the

men as they performed their ancient rites and said:



“We be three gods well versed in the needs of men, to worship whom were

to obtain instant joy.”



But the men said:



“We have already gods.”



And Snyrg replied:



“Ye, too?”



The men answered:



“For we worship the things that have been and all the years that were.

Divinely have they helped us, therefore we give them worship that is

their due.”



And the Yozis answered the people:



“We be gods of the present and return good things for worship.”



But the people answered, saying from the shore:



“Our gods have given us already the good things, and we return Them the

worship that is Their due.”



And the Yozis set their faces to landward, and cursed all things that

had been and all the years that were, and sailed in their galleons

away.



A rocky shore in an inhuman land stood up against the sea. Thither the

Yozis came and found no man, but out of the dark from inland towards

evening came a herd of great baboons and chattered greatly when they

saw the ships.



Then spake Snyrg to them:



“Have ye, too, a god?”



And the baboons spat.



Then said the Yozis:



“We be seductive gods, having a particular remembrance for little

prayers.”



But the baboons leered fiercely at the Yozis and would have none of

them for gods.



One said that prayers hindered the eating of nuts. But Snyrg leaned

forward and whispered, and the baboons went down upon their knees and

clasped their hands as men clasp, and chattered prayer and said to one

another that these were the gods of old, and gave the Yozis their

worship—for Snyrg had whispered in their ears that, if they would

worship the Yozis, he would make them men. And the baboons arose from

worshipping, smoother about the face and a little shorter in the arms,

and went away and hid their bodies in clothing, and afterwards galloped

away from the rocky shore and went and herded with men. And men could

not discern what they were, for their bodies were bodies of men, though

their souls were still the souls of beasts and their worship went to

the Yozis, spirits of ill.



And the lords of malice, hatred and madness sailed back to their island

in the sea and sat upon the shore as gods sit, with right hand

uplifted; and at evening foul prayers from the baboons gathered about

them and infested the rocks.



But in Pegāna the gods awoke with a start.









THE KING THAT WAS NOT





The land of Runazar hath no King nor ever had one; and this is the law

of the land of Runazar that, seeing that it hath never had a King, it

shall not have one for ever. Therefore in Runazar the priests hold

sway, who tell people that never in Runazar hath there been a King.



Althazar, King of Runazar, and lord of all lands near by, commanded for

the closer knowledge of the gods that Their images should be carven in

Runazar, and in all lands near by. And when Althazar’s command, wafted

abroad by trumpets, came tinkling in the ear of all the gods, right

glad were They at the sound of it. Therefore men quarried marble from

the earth, and sculptors busied themselves in Runazar to obey the edict

of the King. But the gods stood by starlight on the hills where the

sculptors might see Them, and draped the clouds about Them, and put

upon Them Their divinest air, that sculptors might do justice to

Pegāna’s gods. Then the gods strode back into Pegāna and the sculptors

hammered and wrought, and there came a day when the Master of Sculptors

took audience of the King, saying:



“Althazar, King of Runazar, High Lord moreover of all the lands near

by, to whom be the gods benignant, humbly have we completed the images

of all such gods as were in thine edict named.”



Then the King commanded a great space to be cleared among the houses in

his city, and there the images of all the gods were borne and set

before the King, and there were assembled the Master of Sculptors and

all his men; and before each stood a soldier bearing a pile of gold

upon a jewelled tray, and behind each stood a soldier with a drawn

sword pointing against their necks, and the King looked upon the

images. And lo! they stood as gods with the clouds all draped about

them, making the sign of the gods, but their bodies were those of men,

and lo! their faces were very like the King’s, and their beards were as

the King’s beard. And the King said:



“These be indeed Pegāna’s gods.”



And the soldiers that stood before the sculptors were caused to present

to them the piles of gold, and the soldiers that stood behind the

sculptors were caused to sheath their swords. And the people shouted:



“These be indeed Pegāna’s gods, whose faces we are permitted to see by

the will of Althazar the King, to whom be the gods benignant.” And

heralds were sent abroad through the cities of Runazar and of all the

lands near by, proclaiming of the images:



“These be Pegāna’s gods.”



But up in Pegāna the gods howled with wrath and Mung leant forward to

make the sign of Mung against Althazar the King. But the gods laid

Their hands upon his shoulder saying:



“Slay him not, for it is not enough that Althazar shall die, who hath

made the faces of the gods to be like the faces of men, but he must not

even have ever been.”



Then said the gods:



“Spake we of Althazar, a King?”



And the gods said:



“Nay, we spake not.” And the gods said:



“Dreamed we of one Althazar?” And the gods said:



“Nay, we dreamed not.”



But in the royal palace of Runazar, Althazar, passing suddenly out of

the remembrance of the gods, became no longer a thing that was or had

ever been.



And by the throne of Althazar lay a robe, and near it lay a crown, and

the priests of the gods entered his palace and made it a temple of the

gods. And the people coming to worship said:



“Whose was this robe and to what purpose is this crown?”



And the priests answered:



“The gods have cast away the fragment of a garment and lo! from the

fingers of the gods hath slipped one little ring.”



And the people said to the priests:



“Seeing that Runazar hath never had a King, therefore be ye our rulers,

and make ye our laws in the sight of Pegāna’s gods.”









THE CAVE OF KAI





The pomp of crowning was ended, the rejoicings had died away, and

Khanazar, the new King, sat in the seat of the Kings of Averon to do

his work upon the destinies of men. His uncle, Khanazar the Lone, had

died, and he had come from a far castle to the south, with a great

procession, to Ilaun, the citadel of Averon; and there they had crowned

him King of Averon and of the mountains, and Lord, if there be aught

beyond those mountains, of all such lands as are. But now the pomp of

the crowning was gone away and Khanazar sat afar off from his home, a

very mighty King.



Then the King grew weary of the destinies of Averon and weary of the

making of commands. So Khanazar sent heralds through all cities saying:



“Hear! The will of the King! Hear! The will of the King of Averon and

of the mountains and Lord, if there be aught beyond those mountains, of

all such lands as are. Let there come together to Ilaun all such as

have an art in secret matters. Hear!”



And there gathered together to Ilaun the wise men of all the degrees of

magic, even to the seventh, who had made spells before Khanazar the

Lone; and they came before the new King in his palace placing their

hands upon his feet. Then said the King to the magicians:



“I have a need.”



And they answered:



“The earth touches the feet of the King in token of submission.”



But the King answered:



“My need is not of the earth; but I would find certain of the hours

that have been, and sundry days that were.”



And all the wise folks were silent, till there spake out mournfully the

wisest of them all, who made spells in the seventh degree, saying:



“The days that were, and the hours, have winged their way to Mount

Agdora’s summit, and there, dipping, have passed away from sight, not

ever to return, for haply they have not heard the King’s command.”



Of these wise folks are many things chronicled. Moreover, it is set in

writing of the scribes how they had audience of King Khanazar and of

the words they spake, but of their further deeds there is no legend.

But it is told how the King sent men to run and pass through all the

cities till they should find one that was wiser even than the magicians

that had made spells before Khanazar the Lone. Far up the mountains

that limit Averon they found Syrahn, the prophet, among the goats, who

was of none of the degrees of magic, and who had cast no spells before

the former King. Him they brought to Khanazar, and the King said unto

him:



“I have a need.”



And Syrahn answered:



“Thou art a man.”



And the King said:



“Where lie the days that were and certain hours?”



And Syrahn answered:



“These things lie in a cave afar from here, and over the cave stands

sentinel one Kai, and this cave Kai hath guarded from the gods and men

since ever the Beginning was made. It may be that he shall let Khanazar

pass by.”



Then the King gathered elephants and camels that carried burdens of

gold, and trusty servants that carried precious gems, and gathered an

army to go before him and an army to follow behind, and sent out

horsemen to warn the dwellers of the plains that the King of Averon was

afoot.



And he bade Syrahn to lead to that place where the days of old lie hid

and all forgotten hours.



Across the plain and up Mount Agdora, and dipping beyond its summit

went Khanazar the King, and his two armies who followed Syrahn. Eight

times the purple tent with golden border had been pitched for the King

of Averon, and eight times it had been struck ere the King and the

King’s armies came to a dark cave in a valley dark, where Kai stood

guard over the days that were. And the face of Kai was as a warrior

that vanquisheth cities and burdeneth himself not with captives, and

his form was as the forms of gods, but his eyes were the eyes of

beasts; before whom came the King of Averon with elephants and camels

bearing burdens of gold, and trusty servants carrying precious gems.



Then said the King:



“Yonder behold my gifts. Give back to me my yesterday with its waving

banners, my yesterday with its music and blue sky and all its cheering

crowds that made me King, the yesterday that sailed with gleaming wings

over my Averon.”



And Kai answered, pointing to his cave:



“Thither, dishonoured and forgot, thy yesterday slunk away. And who

amid the dusty heap of the forgotten days shall grovel to find thy

yesterday?”



Then answered the King of Averon and of the mountains and Lord, if

there be aught beyond them, of all such lands as are:



“I will go down on my knees in yon dark cave and search with my hands

amid the dust, if so I may find my yesterday again and certain hours

that are gone.”



And the King pointed to his piles of gold that stood where elephants

were met together, and beyond them to the scornful camels. And Kai

answered:



“The gods have offered me the gleaming worlds and all as far as the

Rim, and whatever lies beyond it as far as the gods may see—and thou

comest to me with elephants and camels.”



Then said the King:



“Across the orchards of my home there hath passed one hour whereof thou

knowest well, and I pray to thee, who wilt take no gifts borne upon

elephants or camels, to give me of thy mercy one second back, one grain

of dust that clings to that hour in the heap that lies within thy

cave.”



And, at the word mercy, Kai laughed. And the King turned his armies to

the east. Therefore the armies returned to Averon and the heralds

before them cried:



“Here cometh Khanazar, King of Averon and of the mountains and Lord, if

there be aught beyond those mountains, of all such lands as are.”





[Illustration: Kai Laughed]





And the King said to them:



“Say rather that here comes one greatly wearied who, having

accomplished nought, returneth from a quest forlorn.”



So the King came again to Averon.



But it is told how there came into Ilaun one evening as the sun was

setting a harper with a golden harp desiring audience of the King.



And it is told how men led him to Khanazar, who sat frowning alone upon

his throne, to whom said the harper:



“I have a golden harp; and to its strings have clung like dust some

seconds out of the forgotten hours and little happenings of the days

that were.”



And Khanazar looked up and the harper touched the strings, and the old

forgotten things were stirring again, and there arose a sound of songs

that had passed away and long since voices. Then when the harper saw

that Khanazar looked not angrily upon him his fingers tramped over the

chords as the gods tramp down the sky, and out of the golden harp arose

a haze of memories; and the King leaning forward and staring before him

saw in the haze no more his palace walls, but saw a valley with a

stream that wandered through it, and woods upon either hill, and an old

castle standing lonely to the south. And the harper, seeing a strange

look upon the face of Khanazar, said:



“Is the King pleased who lords it over Averon and the mountains, and,

if there be aught beyond them, over all such lands as are?”



And the King said:—



“Seeing that I am a child again in a valley to the south, how may I say

what may be the will of the great King?”



When the stars shone high over Ilaun and still the King sat staring

straight before him, all the courtiers drew away from the great palace,

save one that stayed and kept one taper burning, and with them went the

harper.



And when the dawn came up through silent archways into the marble

palace, making the taper pale, the King still stared before him, and

still he sat there when the stars shone again clearly and high above

Ilaun.



But on the second morning the King arose and sent for the harper and

said to him:—



“I am King again, and thou that hast a skill to stay the hours and

mayest bring again to men their forgotten days, thou shalt stand

sentinel over my great to-morrow; and when I go forth to conquer

Ziman-ho and make my armies mighty thou shalt stand between that morrow

and the cave of Kai, and haply some deed of mine and the battling of my

armies shall cling to thy golden harp and not go down dishonoured into

the cave. For my to-morrow, who with such resounding stride goes

trampling through my dreams, is far too kingly to herd with forgotten

days in the dust of things that were. But on some future day, when

Kings are dead and all their deeds forgotten, some harper of that time

shall come and from those golden strings awake those deeds that echo in

my dreams, till my to-morrow shall stride forth among the lesser days

and tell the years that Khanazar was a King.”



And answered the harper:



“I will stand sentinel over thy great to-morrow, and when thou goest

forth to conquer Ziman-ho and make thine armies mighty I will stand

between thy morrow and the cave of Kai, till thy deeds and the battling

of thine armies shall cling to my golden harp and not go down

dishonoured into the cave. So that when Kings are dead and all their

deeds forgotten the harpers of the future time shall awake from these

golden chords those deeds of thine. This will I do.”



Men of these days, that be skilled upon the harp, tell still of

Khanazar, how that he was King of Averon and of the mountains, and

claimed lordship of certain lands beyond, and how he went with armies

against Ziman-ho and fought great battles, and in the last gained

victory and was slain. But Kai, as he waited with his claws to gather

in the last days of Khanazar that they might loom enormous in his cave,

still found them not, and only gathered in some meaner deeds and the

days and hours of lesser men, and was vexed by the shadow of a harper

that stood between him and the world.









THE SORROW OF SEARCH





It is told also of King Khanazar how he bowed very low unto the gods of

Old. None bowed so low unto the gods of Old as did King Khanazar.



One day the King returning from the worship of the gods of Old and from

bowing before them in the temple of the gods commanded their prophets

to appear before him, saying:



“I would know somewhat concerning the gods.”



Then came the prophets before King Khanazar, burdened with many books,

to whom the King said:



“It is not in books.”



Thereat the prophets departed, bearing away with them a thousand

methods well devised in books whereby men may gain wisdom of the gods.

One alone remained, a master prophet, who had forgotten books, to whom

the King said:



“The gods of Old are mighty.”



And answered the master prophet:



“Very mighty are the gods of Old.”



Then said the King:



“There are no gods but the gods of Old.”



And answered the prophet:



“There are none other.”



And they two being alone within the palace the King said:



“Tell me aught concerning gods or men if aught of the truth be known.”



Then said the master prophet:



“Far and white and straight lieth the road to Knowing, and down it in

the heat and dust go all wise people of the earth, but in the fields

before they come to it the very wise lie down or pluck the flowers. By

the side of the road to Knowing—O King, it is hard and hot—stand many

temples, and in the doorway of every temple stand many priests, and

they cry to the travellers that weary of the road, crying to them:



“This is the End.”



And in the temples are the sounds of music, and from each roof arises

the savour of pleasant burning; and all that look at a cool temple,

whichever temple they look at, or hear the hidden music, turn in to see

whether it be indeed the End. And such as find that their temple is not

indeed the End set forth again upon the dusty road, stopping at each

temple as they pass for fear they miss the End, or striving onwards on

the road, and see nothing in the dust, till they can walk no longer and

are taken worn and weary of their journey into some other temple by a

kindly priest who shall tell them that this also is the End. Neither on

that road may a man gain any guiding from his fellows, for only one

thing that they say is surely true, when they say:



“Friend, we can see nothing for the dust.”



And of the dust that hides the way much has been there since ever that

road began, and some is stirred up by the feet of all that travel upon

it, and more arises from the temple doors.



And, O King, it were better for thee, travelling upon that road, to

rest when thou hearest one calling: “This is the End,” with the sounds

of music behind him. And if in the dust and darkness thou pass by Lo

and Mush and the pleasant temple of Kynash, or Sheenath with his opal

smile, or Sho with his eyes of agate, yet Shilo and Mynarthitep, Gazo

and Amurund and Slig are still before thee and the priests of their

temples will not forget to call thee.



And, O King, it is told that only one discerned the end and passed by

three thousand temples, and the priests of the last were like the

priests of the first, and all said that their temple was at the end of

the road, and the dark of the dust lay over them all, and all were very

pleasant and only the road was weary. And in some were many gods, and

in a few only one, and in some the shrine was empty, and all had many

priests, and in all the travellers were happy as they rested. And into

some his fellow travellers tried to force him, and when he said:



“I will travel further,” many said:



“This man lies, for the road ends here.”



And he that travelled to the End hath told that when the thunder was

heard upon the road there arose the sound of the voices of all the

priests as far as he could hear, crying:



“Hearken to Shilo”—“Hear Mush”—“Lo! Kynash”—“The voice of

Sho”—“Mynarthitep is angry”—“Hear the word of Slig!”



And far away along the road one cried to the traveller that Sheenath

stirred in his sleep.



O King this is very doleful. It is told that that traveller came at

last to the utter End and there was a mighty gulf, and in the darkness

at the bottom of the gulf one small god crept, no bigger than a hare,

whose voice came crying in the cold:



“I know not.”



And beyond the gulf was nought, only the small god crying.



And he that travelled to the End fled backwards for a great distance

till he came to temples again, and entering one where a priest cried:



“This is the End,” lay down and rested on a couch. There Yush sat

silent, carved with an emerald tongue and two great eyes of sapphire,

and there many rested and were happy. And an old priest, coming from

comforting a child, came over to that traveller who had seen the End

and said to him:



“This is Yush and this is the End of wisdom.”



And the traveller answered:



“Yush is very peaceful and this indeed the End.”



“O King, wouldst thou hear more?”



And the King said:



“I would hear all.”



And the master prophet answered:



“There was also another prophet and his name was Shaun, who had such

reverence for the gods of Old that he became able to discern their

forms by starlight as they strode, unseen by others, among men. Each

night did Shaun discern the forms of the gods and every day he taught

concerning them, till men in Averon knew how the gods appeared all grey

against the mountains, and how Rhoog was higher than Mount Scagadon,

and how Skun was smaller, and how Asgool leaned forward as he strode,

and how Trodath peered about him with small eyes. But one night as

Shaun watched the gods of Old by starlight, he faintly discerned some

other gods that sat far up the slopes of the mountains in the stillness

behind the gods of Old. And the next day he hurled his robe away that

he wore as Averon’s prophet and said to his people:



“There be gods greater than the gods of Old, three gods seen faintly on

the hills by starlight looking on Averon.”



And Shaun set out and travelled many days and many people followed him.

And every night he saw more clearly the shapes of the three new gods

who sat silent when the gods of Old were striding among men. On the

higher slopes of the mountain Shaun stopped with all his people, and

there they built a city and worshipped the gods, whom only Shaun could

see, seated above them on the mountain. And Shaun taught how the gods

were like grey streaks of light seen before dawn, and how the god on

the right pointed upward toward the sky, and how the god on the left

pointed downward toward the ground, but the god in the middle slept.



And in the city Shaun’s followers built three temples. The one on the

right was a temple for the young, and the one on the left a temple for

the old, and the third was a temple with doors closed and

barred—therein none ever entered. One night as Shaun watched before the

three gods sitting like pale light against the mountain, he saw on the

mountain’s summit two gods that spake together and pointed, mocking the

gods of the hill, only he heard no sound. The next day Shaun set out

and a few followed him to climb to the mountain’s summit in the cold,

to find the gods who were so great that they mocked at the silent

three. And near the two gods they halted and built for themselves huts.

Also they built a temple wherein the Two were carved by the hand of

Shaun with their heads turned towards each other, with mockery on Their

faces and Their fingers pointing, and beneath Them were carved the

three gods of the hill as actors making sport. None remembered now

Asgool, Trodath, Skun, and Rhoog, the gods of Old.



For many years Shaun and his few followers lived in their huts upon the

mountain’s summit worshipping gods that mocked, and every night Shaun

saw the two gods by starlight as they laughed to one another in the

silence. And Shaun grew old.



One night as his eyes were turned towards the Two, he saw across the

mountains in the distance a great god seated in the plain and looming

enormous to the sky, who looked with angry eyes towards the Two as they

sat and mocked. Then said Shaun to his people, the few that had

followed him thither:



“Alas that we may not rest, but beyond us in the plain sitteth the one

true god and he is wroth with mocking. Let us therefore leave these two

that sit and mock and let us find the truth in the worship of that

greater god, who even though he kill shall yet not mock us.”



But the people answered:



“Thou hast taken from us many gods and taught us now to worship gods

that mock, and if there is laughter on their faces as we die, lo! thou

alone canst see it, and we would rest.”



But three men who had grown old with following followed still.



And down the steep mountain on the further side Shaun led them, saying:



“Now we shall surely know.”



And the three old men answered:



“We shall know indeed, O last of all the prophets.”



That night the two gods mocking at their worshippers mocked not at

Shaun nor his three followers, who coming to the plain still travelled

on till they came at last to a place where the eyes of Shaun at night

could closely see the vast form of their god. And beyond them as far as

the sky there lay a marsh. There they rested, building such shelters as

they could, and said to one another:



“This is the End, for Shaun discerneth that there are no more gods, and

before us lieth the marsh and old age hath come upon us.”



And since they could not labour to build a temple, Shaun carved upon a

rock all that he saw by starlight of the great god of the plain; so

that if ever others forsook the gods of Old because they saw beyond

them the Greater Three, and should thence come to knowledge of the

Twain that mocked, and should yet persevere in wisdom till they saw by

starlight him whom Shaun named the Ultimate god, they should still find

there upon the rock what one had written concerning the end of search.

For three years Shaun carved upon the rock, and rising one night from

carving, saying:



“Now is my labour done,” saw in the distance four greater gods beyond

the Ultimate god. Proudly in the distance beyond the marsh these gods

were tramping together, taking no heed of the god upon the plain. Then

said Shaun to his three followers:



“Alas that we know not yet, for there be gods beyond the marsh.”



None would follow Shaun, for they said that old age must end all

quests, and that they would rather wait there in the plain for Death

than that he should pursue them across the marsh.



Then Shaun said farewell to his followers, saying:



“You have followed me well since ever we forsook the gods of Old to

worship greater gods. Farewell. It may be that your prayers at evening

shall avail when you pray to the god of the plain, but I must go

onward, for there be gods beyond.”



So Shaun went down into the marsh, and for three days struggled through

it, and on the third night saw the four gods not very far away, yet

could not discern Their faces. All the next day Shaun toiled on to see

Their faces by starlight, but ere the night came up or one star shone,

at set of sun, Shaun fell down before the feet of his four gods. The

stars came out, and the faces of the four shone bright and clear, but

Shaun saw them not, for the labour of toiling and seeing was over for

Shaun; and lo! They were Asgool, Trodath, Skun, and Rhoog—The gods of

Old.



Then said the King:



“It is well that the sorrow of search cometh only to the wise, for the

wise are very few.”



Also the King said:



“Tell me this thing, O prophet. Who are the true gods?”



The master prophet answered:



“Let the King command.”









THE MEN OF YARNITH





The men of Yarnith hold that nothing began until Yarni Zai uplifted his

hand. Yarni Zai, they say, has the form of a man but is greater and is

a thing of rock. When he uplifted his hand all the rocks that wandered

beneath the Dome, by which name they call the sky, gathered together

around Yarni Zai.



Of the other worlds they say nought, but hold that the stars are the

eyes of all the other gods that look on Yarni Zai and laugh, for they

are all greater than he, though they have gathered no worlds around

them.



Yet though they be greater than Yarni Zai, and though they laugh at him

when they speak together beneath the Dome, they all speak of Yarni Zai.



Unheard is the speaking of the gods to all except the gods, but the men

of Yarnith tell of how their prophet Iraun lying in the sand desert,

Azrakhan, heard once their speaking and knew thereby how Yarni Zai

departed from all the other gods to clothe himself with rocks and make

a world.



Certain it is that every legend tells that at the end of the valley of

Yodeth, where it becomes lost among black cliffs, there sits a figure

colossal, against a mountain, whose form is the form of a man with the

right hand uplifted, but vaster than the hills. And in the Book of

Secret Things which the prophets keep in the Temple that stands in

Yarnith is writ the story of the gathering of the world as Iraun heard

it when the gods spake together, up in the stillness above Azrakhan.



And all that read this may learn how Yarni Zai drew the mountains about

him like a cloak, and piled the world below him. It is not set in

writing for how many years Yarni Zai sat clothed with rocks at the end

of the Valley of Yodeth, while there was nought in all the world save

rocks and Yarni Zai.



But one day there came another god running over the rocks across the

world, and he ran as the clouds run upon days of storm, and as he sped

towards Yodeth, Yarni Zai, sitting against his mountain with right hand

uplifted, cried out:



“What dost thou, running across my world, and whither art thou going?”



And the new god answered never a word, but sped onwards, and as he went

to left of him and to right of him there sprang up green things all

over the rocks of the world of Yarni Zai.



So the new god ran round the world and made it green, saying in the

valley where Yarni Zai sat monstrous against his mountain and certain

lands wherein Cradoa, the drought, browsed horribly at night.



Further, the writing in the book tells of how there came yet another

god running speedily out of the east, as swiftly as the first, with his

face set westward, and nought to stay his running; and how he stretched

both arms outward beside him, and to left of him and to right of him as

he ran the whole world whitened.



And Yarni Zai called out:



“What dost thou, running across my world?”



And the new god answered:



“I bring the snow for all the world—whiteness and resting and

stillness.”



And he stilled the running of streams and laid his hand even upon the

head of Yarni Zai and muffled the noises of the world, till there was

no sound in all lands, but the running of the new god that brought the

snow as he sped across the plains.



But the two new gods chased each other for ever round the world, and

every year they passed again, running down the valleys and up the hills

and away across the plains before Yarni Zai, whose hand uplifted had

gathered the world about him.



And, furthermore, the very devout may read how all the animals came up

the valley of Yodeth to the mountain whereon rested Yarni Zai, saying:



“Give us leave to live, to be lions, rhinoceroses and rabbits, and to

go about the world.”



And Yarni Zai gave leave to the animals to be lions, rhinoceroses and

rabbits, and all the other kinds of beasts, and to go about the world.

But when they all had gone he gave leave to the bird to be a bird and

to go about the sky.



And further there came a man into that valley who said:



“Yarni Zai, thou hast made animals into thy world. O Yarni Zai, ordain

that there be men.”



So Yarni Zai made men.



Then was there in the world Yarni Zai, and two strange gods that

brought the greenness and the growing and the whiteness and the

stillness, and animals and men.



And the god of the greenness pursued the god of the whiteness, and the

god of the whiteness pursued the god of the greenness, and men pursued

animals, and animals pursued men. But Yarni Zai sat still against his

mountain with his right hand uplifted. But the men of Yarnith say that

when the arm of Yarni Zai shall cease to be uplifted the world shall be

flung behind him, as a man’s cloak is flung away. And Yarni Zai, no

longer clad with the world, shall go back into the emptiness beneath

the Dome among the stars, as a diver seeking pearls goes down from the

islands.



It is writ in Yarnith’s histories by scribes of old that there passed a

year over the valley of Yarnith that bore not with it any rain; and the

Famine from the wastes beyond, finding that it was dry and pleasant in

Yarnith, crept over the mountains and down their slopes and sunned

himself at the edge of Yarnith’s fields.



And men of Yarnith, labouring in the fields, found the Famine as he

nibbled at the corn and chased the cattle, and hastily they drew water

from deep wells and cast it over the Famine’s dry grey fur and drove

him back to the mountains. But the next day when his fur was dry again

the Famine returned and nibbled more of the corn and chased the cattle

further, and again men drove him back. But again the Famine returned,

and there came a time when there was no more water in the wells to

frighten the Famine with, and he nibbled the corn till all of it was

gone and the cattle that he chased grew very lean. And the Famine drew

nearer, even to the houses of men and trampled on their gardens at

night and ever came creeping nearer to their doors. At last the cattle

were able to run no more, and one by one the Famine took them by their

throats and dragged them down, and at night he scratched in the ground,

killing even the roots of things, and came and peered in at the

doorways and started back and peered in at the door again a little

further, but yet was not bold enough to enter altogether, for fear that

men should have water to throw over his dry grey fur.



Then did the men of Yarnith pray to Yarni Zai as he sat far off beyond

the valley, praying to him night and day to call his Famine back, but

the Famine sat and purred and slew all the cattle and dared at last to

take men for his food.



And the histories tell how he slew children first and afterwards grew

bolder and tore down women, till at last he even sprang at the throats

of men as they laboured in the fields.



Then said the men of Yarnith:



“There must go one to take our prayers to the feet of Yarni Zai; for

the world at evening utters many prayers, and it may be that Yarni Zai,

as he hears all earth lamenting when the prayers at evening flutter to

his feet, may have missed among so many the prayers of the men of

Yarnith. But if one go and say to Yarni Zai: ‘There is a little crease

in the outer skirts of thy cloak that men call the valley of Yarnith,

where the Famine is a greater lord than Yarni Zai,’ it may be that he

shall remember for an instant and call his Famine back.”



Yet all men feared to go, seeing that they were but men and Yarni Zai

was Lord of the whole earth, and the journey was far and rocky. But

that night Hothrun Dath heard the Famine whining outside his house and

pawing at his door; therefore, it seemed to him more meet to wither

before the glance of Yarni Zai than that the whining of that Famine

should ever again fall upon his ears.



So about the dawn, Hothrun Dath crept away, fearing still to hear

behind him the breathing of the Famine, and set out upon his journey

whither pointed the graves of men. For men in Yarnith are buried with

their feet and faces turned toward Yarni Zai, lest he might beckon to

them in their night and call them to him.



So all day long did Hothrun Dath follow the way of the graves. It is

told that he even journeyed for three days and nights with nought but

the graves to guide him, as they pointed towards Yarni Zai where all

the world slopes upwards towards Yodeth, and the great black rocks that

are nearest to Yarni Zai lie gathered together by clans, till he came

to the two great black pillars of asdarinth and saw the rocks beyond

them piled in a dark valley, narrow and aloof, and knew that this was

Yodeth. Then did he haste no more, but walked quietly up the valley,

daring not to disturb the stillness, for he said:



“Surely this is the stillness of Yarni Zai, which lay about him before

he clothed himself with rocks.”





[Illustration: Departure of Hothrun Dath]





Here among the rocks which first had gathered to the call of Yarni Zai,

Hothrun Dath felt a mighty fear, but yet went onwards because of all

his people and because he knew that thrice in every hour in some dark

chamber Death and Famine met to speak two words together, “The End.”



But as dawn turned the darkness into grey, he came to the valley’s end,

and even touched the foot of Yarni Zai, but saw him not, for he was all

hidden in the mist. Then Hothrun Dath feared that he might not behold

him to look him in the eyes when he sent up his prayer. But laying his

forehead against the foot of Yarni Zai he prayed for the men of

Yarnith, saying:



“O Lord of Famine and Father of Death, there is a spot in the world

that thou hast cast about thee which men call Yarnith, and there men

die before the time thou hast apportioned, passing out of Yarnith.

Perchance the Famine hath rebelled against thee, or Death exceeds his

powers. O Master of the World, drive out the Famine as a moth out of

thy cloak, lest the gods beyond that regard thee with their eyes

say—there is Yarni Zai, and lo! his cloak is tattered.”



And in the mist no sign made Yarni Zai. Then did Hothrun Dath pray to

Yarni Zai to make some sign with his uplifted hand that he might know

he heard him. In the awe and silence he waited, until nigh the dawn the

mist that hid the figure rolled upwards. Serene above the mountains he

brooded over the world, silent, with right hand uplifted.



What Hothrun Dath saw there upon the face of Yarni Zai no history

telleth, or how he came again alive to Yarnith, but this is writ that

he fled, and none hath since beheld the face of Yarni Zai. Some say

that he saw a look on the face of the image that set a horror tingling

through his soul, but it is held in Yarnith that he found the marks of

instruments of carving about the figure’s feet, and discerning thereby

that Yarni Zai was wrought by the hands of men, he fled down the valley

screaming:



“There are no gods, and all the world is lost.” And hope departed from

him and all the purposes of life. Motionless behind him, lit by the

rising sun, sat the colossal figure with right hand uplifted that man

had made in his own image.



But the men of Yarnith tell how Hothrun Dath came back again panting to

his own city, and told the people that there were no gods and that

Yarnith had no hope from Yarni Zai. Then the men of Yarnith when they

knew that the Famine came not from the gods, arose and strove against

him. They dug deep for wells, and slew goats for food high up on

Yarnith’s mountains and went afar and gathered blades of grass, where

yet it grew, that their cattle might live. Thus they fought the Famine,

for they said: “If Yarni Zai be not a god, then is there nothing

mightier in Yarnith than men, and who is the Famine that he should bare

his teeth against the lords of Yarnith?”



And they said: “If no help cometh from Yarni Zai then is there no help

but from our own strength and might, and we be Yarnith’s gods with the

saving of Yarnith burning within us or its doom according to our

desire.”



And some more the Famine slew, but others raised their hands saying:

“These be the hands of gods,” and drave the Famine back till he went

from the houses of men and out among the cattle, and still the men of

Yarnith pursued him, till above the heat of the fight came the million

whispers of rain heard faintly far off towards evening. Then the Famine

fled away howling back to the mountains and over the mountains’ crests,

and became no more than a thing that is told in Yarnith’s legends.



A thousand years have passed across the graves of those that fell in

Yarnith by the Famine. But the men of Yarnith still pray to Yarni Zai,

carved by men’s hands in the likeness of a man, for they say—“It may be

that the prayers we offer to Yarni Zai may roll upwards from his image

as do the mists at dawn, and somewhere find at last the other gods or

that God who sits behind the others of whom our prophets know not.”









FOR THE HONOUR OF THE GODS





Of the great wars of the Three Islands are many histories writ and of

how the heroes of the olden time one by one were slain, but nought is

told of the days before the olden time, or ever the people of the isles

went forth to war, when each in his own land tended cattle or sheep,

and listless peace obscured those isles in the days before the olden

time. For then the people of the Islands played like children about the

feet of Chance and had no gods and went not forth to war. But sailors,

cast by strange winds upon those shores which they named the Prosperous

Isles, and finding a happy people which had no gods, told how they

should be happier still and know the gods and fight for the honour of

the gods and leave their names writ large in histories and at the last

die proclaiming the names of the gods. And the people of the islands

met and said:



“The beasts we know, but lo! these sailors tell of things beyond that

know us as we know the beasts and use us for their pleasure as we use

the beasts, but yet are apt to answer idle prayer flung up at evening

near the hearth, when a man returneth from the ploughing of the fields.

Shall we now seek these gods?” And some said:



“We are lords of the Three Islands and have none to trouble us, and

while we live we find prosperity, and when we die our bones have ease

in the quiet. Let us not therefore seek those who may loom greater than

we do in the Islands Three or haply harry our bones when we be dead.”



But others said:



“The prayers that a man mutters, when the drought hath come and all the

cattle die, go up unheeded to the heedless clouds, and if somewhere

there be those that garner prayer let us send men to seek them and to

say: ‘There be men in the Isles called Three, or sometimes named by

sailors the Prosperous Isles (and they be in the Central Sea), who

ofttimes pray, and it hath been told us that ye love the worship of

men, and for it answer prayer, and we be travellers from the Islands

Three.’”



And the people of the Islands were greatly allured by the thought of

strange things neither men nor beasts who at evening answered prayer.



Therefore they sent men down in ships with sails to sail across the

sea, and in safety over the sea to a far shore Chance brought the

ships. Then over hill and valley three men set forth seeking to find

the gods, and their comrades beached the ships and waited on the shore.

And they that sought the gods followed for thirty nights the lightnings

in the sky over five mountains, and as they came to the summit of the

last, they saw a valley beneath them, and lo! the gods. For there the

gods sat, each on a marble hill, each sitting with an elbow on his

knee, and his chin upon his hand, and all the gods were smiling about

Their lips. And below them there were armies of little men, and about

the feet of the gods they fought against each other and slew one

another for the honour of the gods, and for the glory of the name of

the gods. And round them in the valley their cities that they had

builded with the toil of their hands, they burned for the honour of the

gods, where they died for the honour of the gods, and the gods looked

down and smiled. And up from the valley fluttered the prayers of men

and here and there the gods did answer a prayer, but oftentimes They

mocked them, and all the while men died.



And they that had sought the gods from the Islands Three, having seen

what they had seen, lay down on the mountain summit lest the gods

should see them. Then they crept backward a little space, still lying

down, and whispered together and then stooped low and ran, and

travelled across the mountains in twenty days and came again to their

comrades by the shore. But their comrades asked them if their quest had

failed and the three men only answered:



“We have seen the gods.”





[Illustration: Lo! The Gods]





And setting sail the ships hove back across the Central Sea and came

again to the Islands Three, where rest the feet of Chance, and said to

the people:



“We have seen the gods.”



But to the rulers of the Islands they told how the gods drove men in

herds; and went back and tended their flocks again all in the

Prosperous Isles, and were kinder to their cattle after they had seen

how that the gods used men.



But the gods walking large about Their valley, and peering over the

great mountain’s rim, saw one morning the tracks of the three men. Then

the gods bent their faces low over the tracks and leaning forward ran,

and came before the evening of the day to the shore where the men had

set sail in ships, and saw the tracks of ships upon the sand, and waded

far out into the sea, and yet saw nought. Still it had been well for

the Islands Three had not certain men that had heard the travellers’

tale sought also to see the gods themselves. These in the night-time

slipped away from the Isles in ships, and ere the gods had retreated to

the hills, They saw where ocean meets with sky the full white sails of

those that sought the gods upon an evil day. Then for a while the

people of those gods had rest while the gods lurked behind the

mountain, waiting for the travellers from the Prosperous Isles. But the

travellers came to shore and beached their ships, and sent six of their

number to the mountain whereof they had been told. But they after many

days returned, having not seen the gods but only the smoke that went

upward from burned cities, and vultures that stood in the sky instead

of answered prayer. And they all ran down their ships again into the

sea, and set sail again and came to the Prosperous Isles. But in the

distance crouching behind the ships the gods came wading through the

sea that They might have the worship of the isles. And to every isle of

the three the gods showed themselves in different garb and guise, and

to all they said:



“Leave your flocks. Go forth and fight for the honour of the gods.”



And from one of the isles all the folk came forth in ships to battle

for gods that strode through the isle like kings. And from another they

came to fight for gods that walked like humble men upon the earth in

beggars’ rags; and the people of the other isle fought for the honour

of gods that were clothed in hair like beasts; and had many gleaming

eyes and claws upon their foreheads. But of how these people fought

till the isles grew desolate but very glorious, and all for the fame of

the gods, are many histories writ.









NIGHT AND MORNING





Once in an arbour of the gods above the fields of twilight Night

wandering alone came suddenly on Morning. Then Night drew from his face

his cloak of dark grey mists and said: “See, I am Night,” and they two

sitting in that arbour of the gods, Night told wondrous stories of old

mysterious happenings in the dark. And Morning sat and wondered, gazing

into the face of Night and at his wreath of stars. And Morning told how

the rains of Snamarthis smoked in the plain, but Night told how

Snamarthis held riot in the dark, with revelry and drinking and tales

told by kings, till all the hosts of Meenath crept against it and the

lights went out and there arose the din of arms or ever Morning came.

And Night told how Sindana the beggar had dreamed that he was a King,

and Morning told how she had seen Sindana find suddenly an army in the

plain, and how he had gone to it thinking he was King and the army had

believed him, and Sindana now ruled over Marthis and Targadrides,

Dynath, Zahn, and Tumeida. And most Night loved to tell of Assarnees,

whose ruins are scant memories on the desert’s edge, but Morning told

of the twin cities of Nardis and Timaut that lorded over the plain. And

Night told terribly of what Mynandes found when he walked through his

own city in the dark. And ever at the elbow of regal Night whispers

arose saying: “Tell Morning _this_.”



And ever Night told and ever Morning wondered. And Night spake on, and

told what the dead had done when they came in the darkness on the King

that had led them into battle once. And Night knew who slew Darnex and

how it was done. Moreover, he told why the seven Kings tortured

Sydatheris and what Sydatheris said just at the last, and how the Kings

went forth and took their lives.



And Night told whose blood had stained the marble steps that lead to

the temple in Ozahn, and why the skull within it wears a golden crown,

and whose soul is in the wolf that howls in the dark against the city.

And Night knew whither the tigers go out of the Irasian desert and the

place where they meet together, and who speaks to them and what she

says and why. And he told why human teeth had bitten the iron hinge in

the great gate that swings in the walls of Mondas, and who came up out

of the marsh alone in the darktime and demanded audience of the King

and told the King a lie, and how the King, believing it, went down into

the vaults of his palace and found only toads and snakes, who slew the

King. And he told of ventures in palace towers in the quiet, and knew

the spell whereby a man might send the light of the moon right into the

soul of his foe. And Night spoke of the forest and the stirring of

shadows and soft feet pattering and peering eyes, and of the fear that

sits behind the trees taking to itself the shape of something crouched

to spring.



But far under that arbour of the gods down on the earth the mountain

peak Mondana looked Morning in the eyes and forsook his allegiance to

Night, and one by one the lesser hills about Mondana’s knees greeted

the Morning. And all the while in the plains the shapes of cities came

looming out of the dusk. And Kongros stood forth with all her

pinnacles, and the winged figure of Poesy carved upon the eastern

portal of her gate, and the squat figure of Avarice carved facing it

upon the west; and the bat began to tire of going up and down her

streets, and already the owl was home. And the dark lions went up out

of the plain back to their caves again. Not as yet shone any dew upon

the spider’s snare nor came the sound of any insects stirring or bird

of the day, and full allegiance all the valleys owned still to their

Lord the Night. Yet earth was preparing for another ruler, and kingdom

by kingdom she stole away from Night, and there marched through the

dreams of men a million heralds that cried with the voice of the cock:

“Lo! Morning come behind us.” But in that arbour of the gods above the

fields of twilight the star wreath was paling about the head of Night,

and ever more wonderful on Morning’s brow appeared the mark of power.

And at the moment when the camp fires pale and the smoke goes grey to

the sky, and camels sniff the dawn, suddenly Morning forgot Night. And

out of that arbour of the gods, and away to the haunts of the dark,

Night with his swart cloak slunk away; and Morning placed her hand upon

the mists and drew them upward and revealed the earth, and drove the

shadows before her, and they followed Night. And suddenly the mystery

quitted haunting shapes, and an old glamour was gone, and far and wide

over the fields of earth a new splendour arose.









USURY





The men of Zonu hold that Yahn is God, who sits as a usurer behind a

heap of little lustrous gems and ever clutches at them with both his

arms. Scarce larger than a drop of water are the gleaming jewels that

lie under the grasping talons of Yahn, and every jewel is a life. Men

tell in Zonu that the earth was empty when Yahn devised his plan, and

on it no life stirred. Then Yahn lured to him shadows whose home was

beyond the Rim, who knew little of joys and nought of any sorrow, whose

place was beyond the Rim before the birth of Time. These Yahn lured to

him and showed them his heap of gems; and in the jewels there was

light, and green fields glistened in them, and there were glimpses of

blue sky and little streams, and very faintly little gardens showed

that flowered in orchard lands. And some showed winds in the heaven,

and some showed the arch of the sky with a waste plain drawn across it,

with grasses bent in the wind and never aught but the plain. But the

gems that changed the most had in their centre the ever changing sea.

Then the shadows gazed into the Lives and saw the green fields and the

sea and earth and the gardens of earth. And Yahn said: “I will loan you

each a Life, and you may do your work with it upon the Scheme of

Things, and have each a shadow for his servant in green fields and in

gardens, only for these things you shall polish these Lives with

experience and cut their edges with your griefs, and in the end shall

return them again to me.”



And thereto the shadows consented, that they might have gleaming Lives

and have shadows for their servants, and this thing became the Law. But

the shadows, each with his Life, departed and came to Zonu and to other

lands, and there with experience they polished the Lives of Yahn, and

cut them with human griefs until they gleamed anew. And ever they found

new scenes to gleam within these Lives, and cities and sails and men

shone in them where there had been before only green fields and sea,

and ever Yahn the usurer cried out to remind them of their bargain.

When men added to their Lives scenes that were pleasant to Yahn, then

was Yahn silent, but when they added scenes that pleased not the eyes

of Yahn, then did he take a toll of sorrow from them because it was the

Law.



But men forgot the usurer, and there arose some claiming to be wise in

the Law, who said that after their labour, which they wrought upon

their Lives, was done, those Lives should be theirs to possess; so men

took comfort from their toil and labour and the grinding and cutting of

their griefs. But as their Lives began to shine with experience of many

things, the thumb and forefinger of Yahn would suddenly close upon a

Life, and the man became a shadow. But away beyond the Rim the shadows

say:



“We have greatly laboured for Yahn, and have gathered griefs in the

world, and caused his Lives to shine, and Yahn doeth nought for us. Far

better had we stayed where no cares are, floating beyond the Rim.”



And there the shadows fear lest ever again they be lured by specious

promises to suffer usury at the hands of Yahn, who is overskilled in

Law. Only Yahn sits and smiles, watching his hoard increase in

preciousness, and hath no pity for the poor shadows whom he hath lured

from their quiet to toil in the form of men.



And ever Yahn lures more shadows and sends them to brighten his Lives,

sending the old Lives out again to make them brighter still; and

sometimes he gives to a shadow a Life that was once a king’s and

sendeth him with it down to the earth to play the part of a beggar, or

sometimes he sendeth a beggar’s Life to play the part of a king. What

careth Yahn?



The men of Zonu have been promised by those that claim to be wise in

the Law that their Lives which they have toiled at shall be theirs to

possess for ever, yet the men of Zonu fear that Yahn is greater and

overskilled in the Law. Moreover it hath been said that Time will bring

the hour when the wealth of Yahn shall be such as his dreams have

lusted for. Then shall Yahn leave the earth at rest and trouble the

shadows no more, but sit and gloat with his unseemly face over his

hoard of Lives, for his soul is a usurer’s soul. But others say, and

they swear that this is true, that there are gods of Old, who be far

greater than Yahn, who made the Law wherein Yahn is overskilled, and

who will one day drive a bargain with him that shall be too hard for

Yahn. Then Yahn shall wander away, a mean forgotten god, and perchance

in some forsaken land shall haggle with the rain for a drop of water to

drink, for his soul is a usurer’s soul. And the Lives—who knoweth the

gods of Old or what Their will shall be?





[Illustration: The Opulence of Yahn]









MLIDEEN





Upon an evening of the forgotten years the gods were seated upon Mowrah

Nawut above Mlideen holding the avalanche in leash.



All in the Middle City stood the Temples of the city’s priests, and

hither came all the people of Mlideen to bring them gifts, and there it

was the wont of the City’s priests to carve them gods for Mlideen. For

in a room apart in the Temple of Eld in the midst of the temples that

stood in the Middle City of Mlideen there lay a book called the Book of

Beautiful Devices, writ in a language that no man may read and writ

long ago, telling how a man may make for himself gods that shall

neither rage nor seek revenge against a little people. And ever the

priests came forth from reading in the Book of Beautiful Devices and

ever they sought to make benignant gods, and all the gods that they

made were different from each other, only their eyes turned all upon

Mlideen.



But upon Mowrah Nawut for all of the forgotten years the gods had

waited and forborne until the people of Mlideen should have carven one

hundred gods. Never came lightnings from Mowrah Nawut crashing upon

Mlideen, nor blight on harvests nor pestilence in the city, only upon

Mowrah Nawut the gods sat and smiled. The people of Mlideen had said:

“Yoma is god.” And the gods sat and smiled. And after the forgetting of

Yoma and the passing of years the people had said: “Zungari is god.”

And the gods sat and smiled.



Then on the altar of Zungari a priest had set a figure squat, carven in

purple agate, saying: “Yazun is god.” Still the gods sat and smiled.





[Illustration: “Yazun is god.”]





About the feet of Yonu, Bazun, Nidish and Sundrao had gone the worship

of the people of Mlideen, and still the gods sat holding the avalanche

in leash above the city.



There set a great calm towards sunset over the heights, and Mowrah

Nawut stood up still with gleaming snow, and into the hot city cool

breezes blew from his benignant slopes as Tarsi Zalo, high prophet of

Mlideen, carved out of a great sapphire the city’s hundredth god, and

then upon Mowrah Nawut the gods turned away saying: “One hundred

infamies have now been wrought.” And they looked no longer upon Mlideen

and held the avalanche no more in leash, and he leapt forward howling.



Over the Middle City of Mlideen now lies a mass of rocks, and on the

rocks a new city is builded wherein people dwell who know not old

Mlideen, and the gods are seated on Mowrah Nawut still. And in the new

city men worship carven gods, and the number of the gods that they have

carven is ninety and nine, and I, the prophet, have found a curious

stone and go to carve it into the likeness of a god for all Mlideen to

worship.









THE SECRET OF THE GODS





Zyni Moe, the small snake, saw the cool river gleaming before him afar

off and set out over the burning sand to reach it.



Uldoon, the prophet, came out of the desert and followed up the bank of

the river towards his old home. Thirty years since Uldoon had left the

city, where he was born, to live his life in a silent place where he

might search for the secret of the gods. The name of his home was the

City by the River, and in that city many prophets taught concerning

many gods, and men made many secrets for themselves, but all the while

none knew the Secret of the gods. Nor might any seek to find it, for if

any sought men said of him:



“This man sins, for he giveth no worship to the gods that speak to our

prophets by starlight when none heareth.”



And Uldoon perceived that the mind of a man is as a garden, and that

his thoughts are as the flowers, and the prophets of a man’s city are

as many gardeners who weed and trim, and who have made in the garden

paths both smooth and straight, and only along these paths is a man’s

soul permitted to go lest the gardeners say, “This soul transgresseth.”

And from the paths the gardeners weed out every flower that grows, and

in the garden they cut off all flowers that grow tall, saying:



“It is customary,” and “it is written,” and “this hath ever been,” or

“that hath not been before.”



Therefore Uldoon saw that not in that city might he discover the Secret

of the gods. And Uldoon said to the people:



“When the worlds began, the Secret of the gods lay written clear over

the whole earth, but the feet of many prophets have trampled it out.

Your prophets are all true men, but I go into the desert to find a

truth which is truer than your prophets.” Therefore Uldoon went into

the desert and in storm and still he sought for many years. When the

thunder roared over the mountains that limited the desert he sought the

Secret in the thunder, but the gods spake not by the thunder. When the

voices of the beasts disturbed the stillness under the stars he sought

the secret there, but the gods spake not by the beasts.



Uldoon grew old and all the voices of the desert had spoken to Uldoon,

but not the gods, when one night he heard Them whispering beyond the

hills. And the gods whispered one to another, and turning Their faces

earthward They all wept. And Uldoon though he saw not the gods yet saw

Their shadows turn as They went back to a great hollow in the hills;

and there, all standing in the valley’s mouth, They said:



“Oh, Morning Zai, oh, oldest of the gods, the faith of thee is gone,

and yesterday for the last time thy name was spoken upon earth.” And

turning earthward they all wept again. And the gods tore white clouds

out of the sky and draped them about the body of Morning Zai and bore

him forth from his valley behind the hills, and muffled the mountain

peaks with snow, and beat upon their summits with drum sticks carved of

ebony, playing the dirge of the gods. And the echoes rolled about the

passes and the winds howled, because the faith of the olden days was

gone, and with it had sped the soul of Morning Zai. So through the

mountain passes the gods came at night bearing Their dead father. And

Uldoon followed. And the gods came to a great sepulchre of onyx that

stood upon four fluted pillars of white marble, each carved out of four

mountains, and therein the gods laid Morning Zai because the old faith

was fallen. And there at the tomb of Their father the gods spake and

Uldoon heard the Secret of the gods, and it became to him a simple

thing such as a man might well guess—yet hath not. Then the soul of the

desert arose and cast over the tomb its wreath of forgetfulness devised

of drifting sand, and the gods strode home across the mountains to

Their hollow land. But Uldoon left the desert and travelled many days,

and so came to the river where it passes beyond the city to seek the

sea, and following its bank came near to his old home. And the people

of the City by the River, seeing him far off, cried out:



“Hast thou found the Secret of the gods?”



And he answered:



“I have found it, and the Secret of the gods is this”—:



Zyni Moe, the small snake, seeing the figure and the shadow of a man

between him and the cool river, raised his head and struck once. And

the gods are pleased with Zyni Moe, and have called him the protector

of the Secret of the gods.





[Illustration: The Tomb of Morning Zai.]









THE SOUTH WIND





Two players sat down to play a game together to while eternity away,

and they chose the gods as pieces wherewith to play their game, and for

their board of playing they chose the sky from rim to rim, whereon lay

a little dust; and every speck of dust was a world upon the board of

playing. And the players were robed and their faces veiled, and the

robes and veils were alike, and their names were Fate and Chance. And

as they played their game and moved the gods hither and thither about

the board, the dust arose, and shone in the light from the players’

eyes that gleamed behind the veils. Then said the gods: “See how We

stir the dust.”



It chanced, or was ordained (who knoweth which?) that Ord, a prophet,

one night saw the gods as They strode knee deep among the stars. But as

he gave Them worship, he saw the hand of a player, enormous over Their

heads, stretched out to make his move. Then Ord, the prophet, knew. Had

he been silent it might have still been well with Ord, but Ord went

about the world crying out to all men, “There is a power over the

gods.”



This the gods heard. Then said They, “Ord hath seen.”



Terrible is the vengeance of the gods, and fierce were Their eyes when

They looked on the head of Ord and snatched out of his mind all

knowledge of Themselves. And that man’s soul went wandering afield to

find for itself gods, for ever finding them not. Then out of Ord’s

Dream of Life the gods plucked the moon and the stars, and in the

night-time he only saw black sky and saw the lights no more. Next the

gods took from him, for Their vengeance resteth not, the birds and

butterflies, flowers and leaves and insects and all small things, and

the prophet looked on the world that was strangely altered, yet knew

not of the anger of the gods. Then the gods sent away his familiar

hills, to be seen no more by him, and all the pleasant woodlands on

their summits and the further fields; and in a narrower world Ord

walked round and round, now seeing little, and his soul still wandered

searching for some gods and finding none.



Lastly, the gods took away the fields and stream and left to the

prophet only his house and the larger things that were in it. Day by

day They crept about him drawing films of mist between him and familiar

things, till at last he beheld nought at all and was quite blind and

unaware of the anger of the gods. Then Ord’s world became only a world

of sound, and only by hearing he kept his hold upon Things. All the

profit that he had out of his days was here some song from the hills or

there the voice of the birds, and sound of the stream, or the drip of

the falling rain. But the anger of the gods ceases not with the closing

of flowers, nor is it assuaged by all the winter’s snows, nor doth it

rest in the full glare of summer, and They snatched away from Ord one

night his world of sound and he awoke deaf. But as a man may smite away

the hive of the bee, and the bee with all his fellows builds again,

knowing not what hath smitten his hive or that it shall smite again, so

Ord built for himself a world out of old memories and set it in the

past. There he builded himself cities out of former joys, and therein

built palaces of mighty things achieved, and with his memory as a key

he opened golden locks and had still a world to live in, though the

gods had taken from him the world of sound and all the world of sight.

But the gods tire not from pursuing, and They seized his world of

former things and took his memory away and covered up the paths that

led into the past, and left him blind and deaf and forgetful among men,

and caused all men to know that this was he who once had said that the

gods were little things.



And lastly the gods took his soul, and out of it They fashioned the

South Wind to roam the seas for ever and not have rest; and well the

South Wind knows that he hath once understood somewhere and long ago,

and so he moans to the islands and cries along southern shores, “I have

known,” and “I have known.”



But all things sleep when the South Wind speaks to them and none heed

his cry that he hath known, but are rather content to sleep. But still

the South Wind, knowing that there is something that he hath forgot,

goes on crying, “I have known,” seeking to urge men to arise and to

discover it. But none heed the sorrows of the South Wind even when he

driveth his tears out of the South, so that though the South Wind cries

on and on and never findeth rest none heed that there is aught that may

be known, and the Secret of the gods is safe. But the business of the

South Wind is with the North, and it is said that the time will one day

come when he shall overcome the bergs and sink the seas of ice and come

where the Secret of the gods is graven upon the pole. And the game of

Fate and Chance shall suddenly cease and He that loses shall cease to

be or ever to have been, and from the board of playing Fate or Chance

(who knoweth which shall win?) shall sweep the gods away.









IN THE LAND OF TIME





Thus Karnith, King of Alatta, spake to his eldest son: “I bequeath to

thee my city of Zoon, with its golden eaves, whereunder hum the bees.

And I bequeath to thee also the land of Alatta, and all such other

lands as thou art worthy to possess, for my three strong armies which I

leave thee may well take Zindara and over-run Istahn, and drive back

Onin from his frontier, and leaguer the walls of Yan, and beyond that

spread conquest over the lesser lands of Hebith, Ebnon, and Karida.

Only lead not thine armies against Zeenar, nor ever cross the Eidis.”



Thereat in the city of Zoon in the land of Alatta, under his golden

eaves, died King Karnith, and his soul went whither had gone the souls

of his sires the elder Kings, and the souls of their slaves.



Then Karnith Zo, the new King, took the iron crown of Alatta and

afterwards went down to the plains that encircle Zoon and found his

three strong armies clamouring to be led against Zeenar, over the river

Eidis.



But the new King came back from his armies, and all one night in the

great palace alone with his iron crown, pondered long upon war; and a

little before dawn he saw dimly through his palace window, facing east

over the city of Zoon and across the fields of Alatta, to far off where

a valley opened on Istahn. There, as he pondered, he saw the smoke

arising tall and straight over small houses in the plain and the fields

where the sheep fed. Later the sun rose shining over Alatta as it shone

over Istahn, and there arose a stir about the houses both in Alatta and

Istahn, and cocks crowed in the city and men went out into the fields

among the bleating sheep; and the King wondered if men did otherwise in

Istahn. And men and women met as they went out to work and the sound of

laughter arose from streets and fields; the King’s eyes gazed into the

distance toward Istahn and still the smoke went upward tall and

straight from the small houses. And the sun rose higher that shone upon

Alatta and Istahn, causing the flowers to open wide in each, and the

birds to sing and the voices of men and women to arise. And in the

market place of Zoon caravans were astir that set out to carry

merchandise to Istahn, and afterwards passed camels coming to Alatta

with many tinkling bells. All this the King saw as he pondered much,

who had not pondered before. Westward the Agnid mountains frowned in

the distance guarding the river Eidis; behind them the fierce people of

Zeenar lived in a bleak land.



Later the King, going abroad through his new kingdom, came on the

Temple of the gods of Old. There he found the roof shattered and the

marble columns broken and tall weeds met together in the inner shrine,

and the gods of Old, bereft of worship or sacrifice, neglected and

forgotten. And the King asked of his councillors who it was that had

overturned this temple of the gods or caused the gods Themselves to be

thus forsaken. And they answered him:



“Time has done this.”



Next the King came upon a man bent and crippled, whose face was

furrowed and worn, and the King having seen no such sight within the

court of his father said to the man:



“Who hath done this thing to you?”



And the old man answered:



“Time hath ruthlessly done it.”



But the King and his councillors went on, and next they came upon a

body of men carrying among them a hearse. And the King asked his

councillors closely concerning death, for these things had not before

been expounded to the King. And the oldest of the councillors answered:



“Death, O King, is a gift sent by the gods by the hand of their servant

Time, and some receive it gladly, and some are forced reluctantly to

take it, and before others it is suddenly flung in the middle of the

day. And with this gift that Time hath brought him from the gods a man

must go forth into the dark to possess no other thing for so long as

the gods are willing.”



But the King went back to his palace and gathered the greatest of his

prophets and his councillors and asked them more particularly

concerning Time. And they told the King how that Time was a great

figure standing like a tall shadow in the dusk or striding, unseen,

across the world, and how that he was the slave of the gods and did

Their bidding, but ever chose new masters, and how all the former

masters of Time were dead and Their shrines forgotten. And one said:



“I have seen him once when I went down to play again in the garden of

my childhood because of certain memories. And it was towards evening

and the light was pale, and I saw Time standing over the little gate,

pale like the light, and he stood between me and that garden and had

stolen my memories because he was mightier than I.”



And another said:



“I, too, have seen the Enemy of my House. For I saw him when he strode

over the fields that I knew well and led a stranger by the hand to

place him in my home to sit where my forefathers sat. And I saw him

afterwards walk thrice round the house and stoop and gather up the

glamour from the lawns and brush aside the tall poppies in the garden

and spread weeds in his pathway where he strode through the remembered

nooks.”



And another said:



“He went one day into the desert and brought up life out of the waste

places, and made it cry bitterly and covered it with the desert again.”



And another said:



“I too saw him once seated in the garden of a child tearing the

flowers, and afterwards he went away through many woodlands and stooped

down as he went, and picked the leaves one by one from the trees.”



And another said:



“I saw him once by moonlight standing tall and black amidst the ruins

of a shrine in the old kingdom of Amarna, doing a deed by night. And he

wore a look on his face such as murderers wear as he busied himself to

cover over something with weeds and dust. Thereafter in Amarna the

people of that old Kingdom missed their god, in whose shrine I saw Time

crouching in the night, and they have not since beheld him.”



And all the while from the distance at the city’s edge rose a hum from

the three armies of the King clamouring to be led against Zeenar.

Thereat the King went down to his three armies and speaking to their

chiefs said:



“I will not go down clad with murder to be King over other lands. I

have seen the same morning arising on Istahn that also gladdened

Alatta, and have heard Peace lowing among the flowers. I will not

desolate homes to rule over an orphaned land and a land widowed. But I

will lead you against the pledged enemy of Alatta who shall crumble the

towers of Zoon and hath gone far to overthrow our gods. He is the foe

of Zindara and Istahn and many-citadeled Yan, Hebith and Ebnon may not

overcome him nor Karida be safe against him among her bleakest

mountains. He is a foe mightier than Zeenar with frontiers stronger

than Eidis; he leers at all the peoples of the earth and mocks their

gods and covets their builded cities. Therefore we will go forth and

conquer Time and save the gods of Alatta from his clutch, and coming

back victorious shall find that Death is gone and age and illness

departed, and here we shall live for ever by the golden eaves of Zoon,

while the bees hum among unrusted gables and never crumbling towers.

There shall be neither fading nor forgetting, nor ever dying nor

sorrow, when we shall have freed the people and pleasant fields of the

earth from inexorable Time.”



And the armies swore that they would follow the King to save the world

and the gods.



So the next day the King set forth with his three armies and crossed

many rivers and marched through many lands, and wherever they went they

asked for news of Time.



And the first day they met a woman with her face furrowed and lined,

who told them that she had been beautiful and that Time had smitten her

in the face with his five claws.



Many an old man they met as they marched in search of Time. All had

seen him but none could tell them more, except that some said he went

that way and pointed to a ruined tower or to an old and broken tree.



And day after day and month by month the King pushed on with his

armies, hoping to come at last on Time. Sometimes they encamped at

night near palaces of beautiful design or beside gardens of flowers,

hoping to find their enemy when he came to desecrate in the dark.

Sometimes they came on cobwebs, sometimes on rusted chains and houses

with broken roofs or crumbling walls. Then the armies would push on

apace thinking that they were closer upon the track of Time.



As the weeks passed by and weeks grew to months, and always they heard

reports and rumours of Time, but never found him, the armies grew weary

of the great march, but the King pushed on and would let none turn

back, saying always that the enemy was near at hand.



Month in, month out, the King led on his now unwilling armies, till at

last they had marched for close upon a year and came to the village of

Astarma very far to the north. There many of the King’s weary soldiers

deserted from his armies and settled down in Astarma and married

Astarmian girls. By these soldiers we have the march of the armies

clearly chronicled to the time when they came to Astarma, having been

nigh a year upon the march. And the army left that village and the

children cheered them as they went up the street, and five miles

distant they passed over a ridge of hills and out of sight. Beyond this

less is known, but the rest of this chronicle is gathered from the

tales that the veterans of the King’s armies used to tell in the

evenings about the fires in Zoon and remembered afterwards by the men

of Zeenar.



It is mostly credited in these days that such of the King’s armies as

went on past Astarma came at last (it is not known after how long a

time) over a crest of a slope where the whole earth slanted green to

the north. Below it lay green fields and beyond them moaned the sea

with never shore nor island so far as the eye could reach. Among the

green fields lay a village, and on this village the eyes of the King

and his armies were turned as they came down the slope. It lay beneath

them, grave with seared antiquity, with old-world gables stained and

bent by the lapse of frequent years, with all its chimneys awry. Its

roofs were tiled with antique stones covered over deep with moss, each

little window looked with a myriad strange cut panes on the gardens

shaped with quaint devices and overrun with weeds. On rusted hinges the

doors swung to and fro and were fashioned of planks of immemorial oak

with black knots gaping from their sockets. Against it all there beat

the thistle-down, about it clambered the ivy or swayed the weeds; tall

and straight out of the twisted chimneys arose blue columns of smoke,

and blades of grass peeped upward between the huge cobbles of the

unmolested street. Between the gardens and the cobbled streets stood

hedges higher than a horseman might look, of stalwart thorn, and upward

through it clambered the convolvulus to peer into the garden from the

top. Before each house there was cut a gap in the hedge, and in it

swung a wicket gate of timber soft with the rain and years, and green

like the moss. Over all of it there brooded age and the full hush of

things bygone and forgotten. Upon this derelict that the years had cast

up out of antiquity the King and his armies gazed long. Then on the

hill slope the King made his armies halt, and went down alone with one

of his chiefs into the village.



Presently there was a stir in one of the houses, and a bat flew out of

the door into the daylight, and three mice came running out of the

doorway down the step, an old stone cracked in two and held together by

moss; and there followed an old man bending on a stick with a white

beard coming to the ground, wearing clothes that were glossed with use,

and presently there came others out of the other houses, all of them as

old, and all hobbling on sticks. These were the oldest people that the

King had ever beheld, and he asked them the name of the village and who

they were; and one of them answered, “This is the City of the Aged in

the Territory of Time.”



And the King said, “Is Time then here?”



And one of the old men pointed to a great castle standing on a steep

hill and said: “Therein dwells Time, and we are his people;” and they

all looked curiously at King Karnith Zo, and the eldest of the

villagers spoke again and said: “Whence do you come, you that are so

young?” and Karnith Zo told him how he had come to conquer Time to save

the world and the gods, and asked them whence they came.



And the villagers said:



“We are older than always, and know not whence we came, but we are the

people of Time, and here from the Edge of Everything he sends out his

hours to assail the world, and you may never conquer Time.” But the

King went back to his armies, and pointed towards the castle on the

hill and told them that at last they had found the Enemy of the Earth;

and they that were older than always went back slowly into their houses

with the creaking of olden doors. And there they went across the fields

and passed the village. From one of his towers Time eyed them all the

while, and in battle order they closed in on the steep hill as Time sat

still in his great tower and watched.



But as the feet of the foremost touched the edge of the hill Time

hurled five years against them, and the years passed over their heads

and the army still came on, an army of older men. But the slope seemed

steeper to the King and to every man in his army, and they breathed

more heavily. And Time summoned up more years, and one by one he hurled

them at Karnith Zo and at all his men. And the knees of the army

stiffened, and their beards grew and turned grey, and the hours and

days and the months went singing over their heads, and their hair

turned whiter and whiter, and the conquering hours bore down, and the

years rushed on and swept the youth of that army clear away till they

came face to face under the walls of the castle of Time with a mass of

howling years, and found the top of the slope too steep for aged men.

Slowly and painfully, harassed with agues and chills, the King rallied

his aged army that tottered down the slope.



Slowly the King led back his warriors over whose heads had shrieked the

triumphant years. Year in, year out, they straggled southwards, always

towards Zoon; they came, with rust upon their spears and long beards

flowing, again into Astarma, and none knew them there. They passed

again by towns and villages where once they had inquired curiously

concerning Time, and none knew them there either. They came again to

the palaces and gardens where they had waited for Time in the night,

and found that Time had been there. And all the while they set a hope

before them that they should come on Zoon again and see its golden

eaves. And no one knew that unperceived behind them there lurked and

followed the gaunt figure of Time cutting off stragglers one by one and

overwhelming them with his hours, only men were missed from the army

every day, and fewer and fewer grew the veterans of Karnith Zo.



But at last after many a month, one night as they marched in the dusk

before the morning, dawn suddenly ascending shone on the eaves of Zoon,

and a great cry ran through the army:



“Alatta, Alatta!”



But drawing nearer they found that the gates were rusted and weeds grew

tall along the outer walls, many a roof had fallen, gables were

blackened and bent, and the golden eaves shone not as heretofore. And

the soldiers entering the city expecting to find their sisters and

sweethearts of a few years ago saw only old women wrinkled with great

age and knew not who they were.



Suddenly someone said:



“He has been here too.”



And then they knew that while they searched for Time, Time had gone

forth against their city and leaguered it with the years, and had taken

it while they were far away and enslaved their women and children with

the yoke of age. So all that remained of the three armies of Karnith Zo

settled in the conquered city. And presently the men of Zeenar crossed

over the river Eidis and easily conquering an army of aged men took all

Alatta for themselves, and their kings reigned thereafter in the city

of Zoon. And sometimes the men of Zeenar listened to the strange tales

that the old Alattans told of the years when they made battle against

Time. Such of these tales as the men of Zeenar remembered they

afterwards set forth, and this is all that may be told of those

adventurous armies that went to war with Time to save the world and the

gods, and were overwhelmed by the hours and the years.









THE RELENTING OF SARNIDAC





The lame boy Sarnidac tended sheep on a hill to the southward of the

city. Sarnidac was a dwarf and greatly derided in the city. For the

women said:



“It is very funny that Sarnidac is a dwarf,” and they would point their

fingers at him saying:—“This is Sarnidac, he is a dwarf; also he is

very lame.”



Once the doors of all the temples in the world swung open to the

morning, and Sarnidac with his sheep upon the hill saw strange figures

going down the white road, always southwards. All the morning he saw

the dust rising above the strange figures and always they went

southwards right as far as the rim of the Nydoon hills where the white

road could be seen no more. And the figures stooped and seemed to be

larger than men, but all men seemed very large to Sarnidac, and he

could not see clearly through the dust. And Sarnidac shouted to them,

as he hailed all people that passed down the long white road, and none

of the figures looked to left or right and none of them turned to

answer Sarnidac. But then few people ever answered him because he was

lame, and a small dwarf.



Still the figures went striding swiftly, stooping forward through the

dust, till at last Sarnidac came running down his hill to watch them

closer. As he came to the white road the last of the figures passed

him, and Sarnidac ran limping behind him down the road.



For Sarnidac was weary of the city wherein all derided him, and when he

saw these figures all hurrying away he thought that they went perhaps

to some other city beyond the hills over which the sun shone brighter,

or where there was more food, for he was poor, even perhaps where

people had not the custom of laughing at Sarnidac. So this procession

of figures that stooped and seemed larger than men went southward down

the road and a lame dwarf hobbled behind them.



Khamazan, now called the City of the Last of Temples, lies southward of

the Nydoon hills. This is the story of Pompeides, now chief prophet of

the only temple in the world, and greatest of all the prophets that

have been:



On the slopes of Nydoon I was seated once above Khamazan. There I saw

figures in the morning striding through much dust along the road that

leads across the world. Striding up the hill they came towards me, not

with the gait of men, and soon the first one came to the crest of the

hill where the road dips to find the plains again, where lies Khamazan.

And now I swear by all the gods that are gone that this thing happened

as I shall say it, and was surely so. When those that came striding up

the hill came to its summit they took not the road that goes down into

the plains nor trod the dust any longer, but went straight on and

upwards, striding as they strode before, as though the hill had not

ended nor the road dipped. And they strode as though they trod no

yielding substance, yet they stepped upwards through the air.



This the gods did, for They were not born men who strode that day so

strangely away from earth.



But I, when I saw this thing, when already three had passed me, leaving

earth, cried out before the fourth:



‘Gods of my childhood, guardians of little homes, whither are ye going,

leaving the round earth to swim alone and forgotten in so great a waste

of sky?’



And one answered:



‘Heresy apace shoots her fierce glare over the world and men’s faith

grows dim and the gods go. Men shall make iron gods and gods of steel

when the wind and the ivy meet within the shrines of the temples of the

gods of old.’



And I left that place as a man leaves fire by night, and going

plainwards down the white road that the gods spurned cried out to all

that I passed to follow me, and so crying came to the city’s gates. And

there I shouted to all near the gates:



‘From yonder hilltop the gods are leaving earth.’



Then I gathered many, and we all hastened to the hill to pray the gods

to tarry, and there we cried out to the last of the departing gods:



‘Gods of old prophecy and of men’s hopes, leave not the earth, and all

our worship shall hum about Your ears as never it hath before, and oft

the sacrifice shall squeal upon Your altars.’



And I said:—



‘Gods of still evenings and quiet nights, go not from earth and leave

not Your carven shrines, and all men shall worship You still. For

between us and yonder still blue spaces oft roam the thunder and the

storms, there in his hiding lurks the dark eclipse, and there are

stored all snows and hails and lightnings that shall vex the earth for

a million years. Gods of our hopes, how shall men’s prayers crying from

empty shrines pass through such terrible spaces; how shall they ever

fare above the thunder and many storms to whatever place the gods may

go in that blue waste beyond?’



But the gods bent straight forward, and trampled through the sky and

looked not to the right nor left nor downwards, nor ever heeded my

prayer.



And one cried out hoping yet to stay the gods, though nearly all were

gone, saying:—



‘O gods, rob not the earth of the dim hush that hangs round all Your

temples, bereave not all the world of old romance, take not the glamour

from the moonlight nor tear the wonder out of the white mists in every

land; for, O ye gods of the childhood of the world, when You have left

the earth you shall have taken the mystery from the sea and all its

glory from antiquity, and You shall have wrenched out hope from the dim

future. There shall be no strange cries at night time half understood,

nor songs in the twilight, and the whole of the wonder shall have died

with last year’s flowers in little gardens or hill-slopes leaning

south; for with the gods must go the enchantment of the plains and all

the magic of dark woods, and something shall be lacking from the quiet

of early dawn. For it would scarce befit the gods to leave the earth

and not take with Them that which They had given it. Out beyond the

still blue spaces Ye will need the holiness of sunset for Yourselves

and little sacred memories and the thrill that is in stories told by

firesides long ago. One strain of music, one song, one line of poetry

and one kiss, and a memory of one pool with rushes, and each one the

best, shall the gods take to whom the best belongs, when the gods go.



‘Sing a lamentation, people of Khamazan, sing a lamentation for all the

children of earth at the feet of the departing gods. Sing a lamentation

for the children of earth who now must carry their prayers to empty

shrines and around empty shrines must rest at last.’



Then when our prayers were ended and our tears shed, we beheld the last

and smallest of the gods halted upon the hilltop. Twice he called to

Them with a cry somewhat like the cry wherewith our shepherds hail

their brethren, and long gazed after Them, and then deigned to look no

longer and to tarry upon earth and turn his eyes on men. Then a great

shout went up when we saw that our hopes were saved and that there was

still on earth a haven for our prayers. Smaller than men now seemed the

figures that had loomed so big, as one behind the other far over our

heads They still strode upwards. But the small god that had pitied the

world came with us down the hill, still deigning to tread the road,

though strangely, not as men tread, and into Khamazan. There we housed

him in the palace of the King, for that was before the building of the

temple of gold, and the King made sacrifice before him with his own

hands, and he that had pitied the world did eat the flesh of the

sacrifice.



And the Book of the Knowledge of the gods in Khamazan tells how the

small god that pitied the world told his prophets that his name was

Sarnidac and that he herded sheep, and that therefore he is called the

shepherd god, and sheep are sacrificed upon his altars thrice a day,

and the North, East, West and the South are the four hurdles of

Sarnidac and the white clouds are his sheep. And the Book of the

Knowledge of the gods tells further how the day on which Pompeides

found the gods shall be kept for ever as a fast until the evening and

called the Fast of the Departing, but in the evening shall a feast be

held which is named the Feast of the Relenting, for on that evening

Sarnidac pitied the whole world and tarried.



And the people of Khamazan all prayed to Sarnidac, and dreamed their

dreams and hoped their hopes because their temple was not empty.

Whether the gods that are departed be greater than Sarnidac none know

in Khamazan, but some believe that in their azure windows They have set

lights that lost prayers swarming upwards may come to them like moths

and at last find haven and light far up above the evening and the

stillness where sit the gods.



But Sarnidac wondered at the strange figures, at the people of

Khamazan, and at the palace of the King and the customs of the

prophets, but wondered not more greatly at aught in Khamazan than he

had wondered at the city which he had left. For Sarnidac, who had not

known why men were unkind to him, thought that he had found at last the

land for which the gods had let him hope, where men should have the

custom of being kind to Sarnidac.









THE JEST OF THE GODS





Once the Older gods had need of laughter. Therefore They made the soul

of a king, and set in it ambitions greater than kings should have, and

lust for territories beyond the lust of other kings, and in this soul

They set strength beyond the strength of others and fierce desire for

power and a strong pride. Then the gods pointed earthward and sent that

soul into the fields of men to live in the body of a slave. And the

slave grew, and the pride and lust for power began to arise in his

heart, and he wore shackles on his arms. Then in the Fields of Twilight

the gods prepared to laugh.



But the slave went down to the shore of the great sea, and cast his

body away and the shackles that were upon it, and strode back to the

Fields of Twilight and stood up before the gods and looked Them in

Their faces. This thing the gods, when They had prepared to laugh, had

not foreseen. Lust for power burned strong in that King’s soul, and

there was all the strength and pride in it that the gods had placed

therein, and he was too strong for the Older gods. He whose body had

borne the lashes of men could brook no longer the dominion of the gods,

and standing before Them he bade the gods to go. Up to Their lips leapt

all the anger of the Older gods, being for the first time commanded,

but the King’s soul faced Them still, and Their anger died away and

They averted Their eyes. Then Their thrones became empty, and the

Fields of Twilight bare as the gods slunk far away. But the soul chose

new companions.









THE DREAMS OF THE PROPHET



I



When the gods drave me forth to toil and assailed me with thirst and

beat me down with hunger, then I prayed to the gods. When the gods

smote the cities wherein I dwelt, and when Their anger scorched me and

Their eyes burned, then did I praise the gods and offer sacrifice. But

when I came again to my green land and found that all was gone, and the

old mysterious haunts wherein I prayed as a child were gone, and when

the gods tore up the dust and even the spider’s web from the last

remembered nook, then did I curse the gods, speaking it to Their faces,

saying:—



“Gods of my prayers! Gods of my sacrifice! because Ye have forgotten

the sacred places of my childhood, and they have therefore ceased to

be, yet may I not forget. Because Ye have done this thing, Ye shall see

cold altars and shall lack both my fear and praise. I shall not wince

at Your lightnings, nor be awed when Ye go by.”



Then looking seawards I stood and cursed the gods, and at this moment

there came to me one in the garb of a poet, who said:—



“Curse not the gods.”



And I said to him:



“Wherefore should I not curse Those that have stolen my sacred places

in the night, and trodden down the gardens of my childhood?”



And he said “Come, and I will show thee.” And I followed him to where

two camels stood with their faces towards the desert. And we set out

and I travelled with him for a great space, he speaking never a word,

and so we came at last to a waste valley hid in the desert’s midst. And

herein, like fallen moons, I saw vast ribs that stood up white out of

the sand, higher than the hills of the desert. And here and there lay

the enormous shapes of skulls like the white marble domes of palaces

built for tyrannous kings a long while since by armies of driven

slaves. Also there lay in the desert other bones, the bones of vast

legs and arms, against which the desert, like a besieging sea, ever

advanced and already had half drowned. And as I gazed in wonder at

these colossal things the poet said to me:



“The gods are dead.”



And I gazed long in silence, and I said:



“These fingers, that are now so dead and so very white and still, tore

once the flowers in gardens of my youth.”



But my companion said to me:



“I have brought thee here to ask of thee thy forgiveness of the gods,

for I, being a poet, knew the gods, and would fain drive off the curses

that hover above Their bones and bring Them men’s forgiveness as an

offering at the last, that the weeds and the ivy may cover Their bones

from the sun.”



And I said:



“They made Remorse with his fur grey like a rainy evening in the

autumn, with many rending claws, and Pain with his hot hands and

lingering feet, and Fear like a rat with two cold teeth carved each out

of the ice of either pole, and Anger with the swift flight of the

dragonfly in summer having burning eyes. I will not forgive these

gods.”



But the poet said:



“Canst thou be angry with these beautiful white bones?” And I looked

long at those curved and beautiful bones that were no longer able to

hurt the smallest creature in all the worlds that they had made. And I

thought long of the evil that they had done, and also of the good. But

when I thought of Their great hands coming red and wet from battles to

make a primrose for a child to pick, then I forgave the gods.



And a gentle rain came falling out of heaven and stilled the restless

sand, and a soft green moss grew suddenly and covered the bones till

they looked like strange green hills, and I heard a cry and awoke and

found that I had dreamed, and looking out of my house into the street I

found that a flash of lightning had killed a child. Then I knew that

the gods still lived.



II



I lay asleep in the poppy fields of the gods in the valley of Alderon,

where the gods come by night to meet together in council when the moon

is low. And I dreamed that this was the Secret.



Fate and Chance had played their game and ended, and all was over, all

the hopes and tears, regrets, desires and sorrows, things that men wept

for and unremembered things, and kingdoms and little gardens and the

sea, and the worlds and the moons and the suns; and what remained was

nothing, having neither colour nor sound.



Then said Fate to Chance: “Let us play our old game again.” And they

played it again together, using the gods as pieces, as they had played

it oft before. So that those things which have been shall all be again,

and under the same bank in the same land a sudden glare of sunlight on

the same spring day shall bring the same daffodil to bloom once more

and the same child shall pick it, and not regretted shall be the

billion years that fell between. And the same old faces shall be seen

again, yet not bereaved of their familiar haunts. And you and I shall

in a garden meet again upon an afternoon in summer when the sun stands

midway between his zenith and the sea, where we met oft before. For

Fate and Chance play but one game together with every move the same,

and they play it oft to while eternity away.









PART II.









THE JOURNEY OF THE KING





I



One day the King turned to the women that danced and said to them:

“Dance no more,” and those that bore the wine in jewelled cups he sent

away. The palace of King Ebalon was emptied of sound of song and there

rose the voices of heralds crying in the streets to find the prophets

of the land.



Then went the dancers, the cupbearer and the singers down into the hard

streets among the houses, Pattering Leaves, Silvern Fountain and Summer

Lightning, the dancers whose feet the gods had not devised for stony

ways, which had only danced for princes. And with them went the singer,

Soul of the South, and the sweet singer, Dream of the Sea, whose voices

the gods had attuned to the ears of kings, and old Istahn the cupbearer

left his life’s work in the palace to tread the common ways, he that

had stood at the elbows of three kings of Zarkandhu and had watched his

ancient vintage feeding their valour and mirth as the waters of

Tondaris feed the green plains to the south. Ever he had stood grave

among their jests, but his heart warmed itself solely by the fire of

the mirth of Kings. He too, with the singers and dancers, went out into

the dark.



And throughout the land the heralds sought out the prophets thereof.

Then one evening as King Ebalon sat alone within his palace there were

brought before him all who had repute for wisdom and who wrote the

histories of the times to be. Then the King spake, saying: “The King

goeth upon a journey with many horses, yet riding upon none, when the

pomp of travelling shall be heard in the streets and the sound of the

lute and the drum and the name of the King. And I would know what

princes and what people shall greet me on the other shore in the land

to which I travel.”



Then fell a hush upon the prophets for they murmured: “All knowledge is

with the King.”



Then said the King: “Thou first, Samahn, High Prophet of the Temple of

gold in Azinorn, answer or thou shalt write no more the history of the

times to be, but shalt toil with thy hand to make record of the little

happenings of the days that were, as do the common men.”



Then said Samahn: “All knowledge is with the King,” and when the pomp

of travelling shall be heard in the streets and the slow horses whereon

the King rideth not go behind lute and drum, then, as the King well

knoweth, thou shalt go down to the great white house of Kings and,

entering the portals where none are worthy to follow, shalt make

obeisance alone to all the elder Kings of Zarkandhu, whose bones are

seated upon golden thrones grasping their sceptres still. Therein thou

shalt go with robes and sceptre through the marble porch, but thou

shalt leave behind thee thy gleaming crown that others may wear it, and

as the times go by come in to swell the number of the thirty Kings that

sit in the great white house on golden thrones. There is one doorway in

the great white house, and it stands wide with marble portals yawning

for kings, but when it shall receive thee, and thine obeisance hath

been made because of thine obligation to the thirty Kings, thou shalt

find at the back of the house an unknown door through which the soul of

a King may just pass, and leaving thy bones upon a golden throne thou

shalt go unseen out of the great white house to tread the velvet spaces

that lie among the worlds. Then, O King, it were well to travel fast

and not to tarry about the houses of men as do the souls of some who

still bewail the sudden murder that sent them upon the journey before

their time, and who, being yet loth to go, linger in dark chambers all

the night. These, setting forth to travel in the dawn and travelling

all the day, see earth behind them gleaming when evening falls, and

again are loth to leave its pleasant haunts, and come back again

through dark woods and up into some old loved chamber, and ever tarry

between home and flight and find no rest.



Thou wilt set forth at once because the journey is far and lasts for

many hours; but the hours on the velvet spaces are the hours of the

gods, and we may not say what time such an hour may be if reckoned in

mortal years.



At last thou shalt come to a grey place filled with mist, with grey

shapes standing before it which are altars, and on the altars rise

small red flames from dying fires that scarce illumine the mist. And in

the mist it is dark and cold because the fires are low. These are the

altars of the people’s faiths, and the flames are the worship of men,

and through the mist the gods of Old go groping in the dark and in the

cold. There thou shalt hear a voice cry feebly: “Inyani, Inyani, lord

of the thunder, where art thou, for I cannot see?” And a voice shall

answer faintly in the cold: “O maker of many worlds, I am here.” And in

that place the gods of Old are nearly deaf for the prayers of men grow

few, they are nigh blind because the fires burn low upon the altars of

men’s faiths and they are very cold. And all about the place of mist

there lies a moaning sea which is called the Sea of Souls. And behind

the place of mist are the dim shapes of mountains, and on the peak of

one there glows a silvern light that shines in the moaning sea; and

ever as the flames on the altars die before the gods of Old the light

on the mountain increases, and the light shines over the mist and never

through it as the gods of Old grow blind. It is said that the light on

the mountain shall one day become a new god who is not of the gods of

Old.



There, O King, thou shalt enter the Sea of Souls by the shore where the

altars stand which are covered in mist. In that sea are the souls of

all that ever lived on the worlds and all that ever shall live, all

freed from earth and flesh. And all the souls in that sea are aware of

one another but more than with hearing or sight or by taste or touch or

smell, and they all speak to each other yet not with lips, with voices

which need no sound. And over the sea lies music as winds o’er an ocean

on earth, and there unfettered by language great thoughts set outward

through the souls as on earth the currents go.



Once did I dream that in a mist-built ship I sailed upon that sea and

heard the music that is not of instruments, and voices not from lips,

and woke and found that I was upon the earth and that the gods had lied

to me in the night. Into this sea from fields of battle and cities come

down the rivers of lives, and ever the gods have taken onyx cups and

far and wide into the worlds again have flung the souls out of the sea,

that each soul may find a prison in the body of a man with five small

windows closely barred, and each one shackled with forgetfulness.



But all the while the light on the mountain grows, and none may say

what work the god that shall be born of the silvern light shall work on

the Sea of Souls, when the gods of Old are dead and the Sea is living

still.



And answer made the King:



“Thou that art a prophet of the gods of Old, go back and see that those

red flames burn more brightly on the altars in the mist, for the gods

of Old are easy and pleasant gods, and thou canst not say what toil

shall vex our souls when the god of the light on the mountain shall

stride along the shore where bleach the huge bones of the gods of Old.”



And Samahn answered: “All knowledge is with the King.”



II



Then the King called to Ynath bidding him speak concerning the journey

of the King. Ynath was the prophet that sat at the Eastern gate of the

Temple of Gorandhu. There Ynath prayed his prayers to all the passers

by lest ever the gods should go abroad, and one should pass him dressed

in mortal guise. And men are pleased as they walk by that Eastern gate

that Ynath should pray to them for fear that they be gods, so men bring

gifts to Ynath in the Eastern gate.



And Ynath said: “All knowledge is with the King. When a strange ship

comes to anchor in the air outside thy chamber window, thou shalt leave

thy well-kept garden and it shall become a prey to the nights and days

and be covered again with grass. But going aboard thou shalt set sail

over the Sea of Time and well shall the ship steer through the many

worlds and still sail on. If other ships shall pass thee on the way and

hail thee saying: ‘From what port’ thou shalt answer them: ‘From

Earth.’ And if they ask thee ‘whither bound?’ then thou shalt answer:

‘The End.’ Or thou shalt hail them saying: ‘From what port?’ And they

shall answer: ‘From The End called also The Beginning, and bound to

Earth.’ And thou shalt sail away till like an old sorrow dimly felt by

happy men the worlds shall gleam in the distance like one star, and as

the star pales thou shalt come to the shore of space where aeons

rolling shorewards from Time’s sea shall lash up centuries to foam away

in years. There lies the Centre Garden of the gods, facing full

seawards. All around lie songs that on earth were never sung, fair

thoughts not heard among the worlds, dream pictures never seen that

drifted over Time without a home till at last the aeons swept them on

to the shore of space. And in the Centre Garden of the gods bloom many

fancies. Therein once some souls were playing where the gods walked up

and down and to and fro. And a dream came in more beauteous than the

rest on the crest of a wave of Time, and one soul going downward to the

shore clutched at the dream and caught it. Then over the dreams and

stories and old songs that lay on the shore of space the hours came

sweeping back, and the centuries caught that soul and swirled him with

his dream far out to the Sea of Time, and the aeons swept him

earthwards and cast him into a palace with all the might of the sea and

left him there with his dream. The child grew to a King and still

clutched at his dream till the people wondered and laughed. Then, O

King, Thou didst cast thy dream back into the Sea, and Time drowned it

and men laughed no more, but thou didst forget that a certain sea beat

on a distant shore and that there was a garden and therein souls. But

at the end of the journey that thou shalt take, when thou comest to the

shore of space again thou shalt go up the beach, and coming to a garden

gate that stands in a garden wall shalt remember these things again,

for it stands where the hours assail not above the beating of Time, far

up the shore, and nothing altereth there. So thou shalt go through the

garden gate and hear again the whispering of the souls when they talk

low where sing the voices of the gods. There with kindred souls thou

shalt speak as thou didst of yore and tell them what befell thee beyond

the tides of time and how they took thee and made of thee a King so

that thy soul found no rest. There in the Centre Garden thou shalt sit

at ease and watch the gods all rainbow-clad go up and down and to and

fro on the paths of dreams and songs, and shalt not venture down to the

cheerless sea. For that which a man loves most is not on this side of

Time, and all which drifts on its aeons is a lure.



“All knowledge is with the King.”



Then said the King: “Ay, there was a dream once but Time hath swept it

away.”



III



Then spake Monith, Prophet of the Temple of Azure that stands on the

snow-peak of Ahmoon and said: “All knowledge is with the King. Once

thou didst set out upon a one day’s journey riding thy horse and before

thee had gone a beggar down the road, and his name was Yeb. Him thou

didst overtake and when he heeded not thy coming thou didst ride over

him.



“Upon the journey that thou shalt one day take riding upon no horse,

this beggar has set out before thee and is labouring up the crystal

steps towards the moon as a man goeth up the steps of a high tower in

the dark. On the moon’s edge beneath the shadow of Mount Angises he

shall rest awhile and then shall climb the crystal steps again. Then a

great journey lies before him before he may rest again till he come to

that star that is called the left eye of Gundo. Then a journey of many

crystal steps lieth before him again with nought to guide him but the

light of Omrazu. On the edge of Omrazu shall Yeb tarry long, for the

most dreadful part of his journey lieth before him. Up the crystal

steps that lie beyond Omrazu he must go, and any that follow, though

the howling of all the meteors that ride the sky; for in that part of

the crystal space go many meteors up and down all squealing in the

dark, which greatly perplex all travellers. And, if he may see though

the gleaming of the meteors and in spite of their uproar come safely

through, he shall come to the star Omrund at the edge of the Track of

Stars. And from star to star along the Track of Stars the soul of a man

may travel with more ease, and there the journey lies no more straight

forward, but curves to the right.”



Then said King Ebalon:



“Of this beggar whom my horse smote down thou hast spoken much, but I

sought to know by what road a King should go when he taketh his last

royal journey, and what princes and what people should meet him upon

another shore.”



Then answered Monith:



“All knowledge is with the King. It hath been doomed by the gods, who

speak not in jest, that thou shalt follow the soul that thou didst send

alone upon its journey, that that soul go not unattended up the crystal

steps.



“Moreover, as this beggar went upon his lonely journey he dared to

curse the King, and his curses lie like a red mist along the valleys

and hollows wherever he uttered them. By these red mists, O King, thou

shalt track him as a man follows a river by night until thou shalt fare

at last to the land wherein he hath blessed thee (repenting of anger at

last), and thou shalt see his blessing lie over the land like a blaze

of golden sunshine illumining fields and gardens.”



Then said the King:



“The gods have spoken hard above the snowy peak of this mountain

Ahmoon.”



And Monith said:



“How a man may come to the shore of space beyond the tides of time I

know not, but it is doomed that thou shalt certainly first follow the

beggar past the moon, Omrund and Omrazu till thou comest to the Track

of Stars, and up the Track of Stars coming towards the right along the

edge of it till thou comest to Ingazi. There the soul of the beggar Yeb

sat long, then, breathing deep, set off on his great journey earthward

adown the crystal steps. Straight through the spaces where no stars are

found to rest at, following the dull gleam of earth and her fields till

he come at last where journeys end and start.”



Then said King Ebalon:



“If this hard tale be true, how shall I find the beggar that I must

follow when I come again to the earth?”



And the Prophet answered:



“Thou shalt know him by his name and find him in this place, for that

beggar shall be called King Ebalon and he shall be sitting upon the

throne of the Kings of Zarkandhu.”



And the King answered:



“If one sit upon this throne whom men call King Ebalon, who then shall

I be?”



And the Prophet answered:



“Thou shalt be a beggar and thy name shall be Yeb, and thou shalt ever

tread the road before the palace waiting for alms from the King whom

men shall call Ebalon.”



Then said the King:



“Hard gods indeed are those that tramp the snows of Ahmoon about the

temple of Azure, for if I sinned against this beggar called Yeb, they

too have sinned against him when they doomed him to travel on this

weary journey though he hath not offended.”



And Monith said:



“He too hath offended, for he was angry as thy horse struck him, and

the gods smite anger. And his anger and his curses doom him to journey

without rest as also they doom thee.”



Then said the King:



“Thou that sittest upon Ahmoon in the Temple of Azure, dreaming thy

dreams and making prophecies, foresee the ending of this weary quest

and tell me where it shall be?”



And Monith answered:



“As a man looks across great lakes I have gazed into the days to be,

and as the great flies come upon four wings of gauze to skim over blue

waters, so have my dreams come sailing two by two out of the days to

be. And I dreamed that King Ebalon, whose soul was not thy soul, stood

in his palace in a time far hence, and beggars thronged the street

outside, and among them was Yeb, a beggar, having thy soul. And it was

on the morning of a festival and the King came robed in white, with all

his prophets and his seers and magicians, all down the marble steps to

bless the land and all that stood therein as far as the purple hills,

because it was the morning of festival. And as the King raised up his

hand over the beggars’ heads to bless the fields and rivers and all

that stood therein, I dreamed that the quest was ended.



“All knowledge is with the King.”



IV



Evening darkened and above the palace domes gleamed out the stars

whereon haply others missed the secret too.



And outside the palace in the dark they that had borne the wine in

jewelled cups mocked in low voices at the King and at the wisdom of his

prophets.



Then spake Ynar, called the prophet of the Crystal Peak; for there

rises Amanath above all that land, a mountain whose peak is crystal,

and Ynar beneath its summit hath his Temple, and when day shines no

longer on the world Amanath takes the sunlight and gleams afar as a

beacon in a bleak land lit at night. And at the hour when all faces are

turned on Amanath, Ynar comes forth beneath the Crystal peak to weave

strange spells and to make signs that people say are surely for the

gods. Therefore it is said in all those lands that Ynar speaks at

evening to the gods when all the world is still.



And Ynar said:



“All knowledge is with the King, and without doubt it hath come to the

King’s ears how certain speech is held at evening on the Peak of

Amanath.



“They that speak to me at evening on the Peak are They that live in a

city through whose streets Death walketh not, and I have heard it from

Their Elders that the King shall take no journey; only from thee the

hills shall slip away, the dark woods, the sky and all the gleaming

worlds that fill the night, and the green fields shall go on untrodden

by thy feet and the blue sky ungazed at by thine eyes, and still the

rivers shall all run seaward but making no music in thine ears. And all

the old laments shall still be spoken, troubling thee not, and to the

earth shall fall the tears of the children of earth and never grieving

thee. Pestilence, heat and cold, ignorance, famine and anger, these

things shall grip their claws upon all men as heretofore in fields and

roads and cities but shall not hold thee. But from thy soul, sitting in

the old worn track of the worlds when all is gone away, shall fall off

the shackles of circumstance and thou shalt dream thy dreams alone.



“And thou shalt find that dreams are real where there is nought as far

as the Rim but only thy dreams and thee.



“With them thou shalt build palaces and cities resting upon nothing and

having no place in time, not to be assailed by the hours or harmed by

ivy or rust, not to be taken by conquerors, but destroyed by thy fancy

if thou dost wish it so or by thy fancy rebuilded. And nought shall

ever disturb these dreams of thine which here are troubled and lost by

all the happenings of earth, as the dreams of one who sleeps in a

tumultuous city. For these thy dreams shall sweep outward like a strong

river over a great waste plain wherein are neither rocks nor hills to

turn it, only in that place there shall be no boundaries nor sea,

neither hindrance nor end. And it were well for thee that thou shouldst

take few regrets into thy waste dominions from the world wherein thou

livest, for such regrets or any memory of deeds ill done must sit

beside thy soul forever in that waste, singing one song always of

forlorn remorse; and they too shall be only dreams but very real.



“There nought shall hinder thee among thy dreams, for even the gods may

harass thee no more when flesh and earth and events with which They

bound thee shall have slipped away.”



Then said the King:



“I like not this grey doom, for dreams are empty. I would see action

roaring through the world, and men and deeds.”



Then answered the Prophet:



“Victory, jewels and dancing but please thy fancy. What is the sparkle

of the gem to thee without thy fancy which it allures, and thy fancy is

all a dream. Action and deeds and men are nought without dreams and do

but fetter them, and only dreams are real, and where thou stayest when

the worlds shall drift away there shall be only dreams.”



And the King answered:



“A mad prophet.”



And Ynar said:



“A mad prophet, but believing that his soul possesseth all things of

which his soul may become aware and that he is master of that soul, and

thou a high-minded King believing only that thy soul possesseth such

few countries as are leaguered by thine armies and the sea, and that

thy soul is possessed by certain strange gods of whom thou knowest not,

who shall deal with it in a way whereof thou knowest not. Until a

knowledge come to us that either is wrong I have wider realms, I King,

than thee and hold them beneath no overlords.”



Then said the King:



“Thou hast said no overlords! To whom then dost thou speak by strange

signs at evening above the world?”



And Ynar went forward and whispered to the King. And the King shouted:



“Seize ye this prophet for he is a hypocrite and speaks to no gods at

evening above the world, but has deceived us with his signs.”



And Ynar said:



“Come not near me or I shall point towards you when I speak at evening

upon the mountain with Those that ye know of.”



Then Ynar went away and the guards touched him not.



V



Then spake the prophet Thun, who was clad in seaweed and had no Temple,

but lived apart from men. All his life he had lived on a lonely beach

and had heard for ever the wailing of the sea and the crying of the

wind in hollows among the cliffs. Some said that having lived so long

by the full beating of the sea, and where always the wind cries

loudest, he could not feel the joys of other men, but only felt the

sorrow of the sea crying in his soul for ever.



“Long ago on the path of stars, midmost between the worlds, there

strode the gods of Old. In the bleak middle of the worlds They sat and

the worlds went round and round, like dead leaves in the wind at

Autumn’s end, with never a life on one, while the gods went sighing for

the things that might not be. And the centuries went over the gods to

go where the centuries go, toward the End of Things, and with Them went

the sighs of all the gods as They longed for what might not be.



“One by one in the midst of the worlds, fell dead the gods of Old,

still sighing for the things that might not be, all slain by Their own

regrets. Only Shimono Kani, the youngest of the gods, made him a harp

out of the heart strings of all the elder gods, and, sitting upon the

Path of Stars in the Middle of Things, played upon the harp a dirge for

the gods of Old. And the song told of all vain regrets and of unhappy

loves of the gods in the olden time, and of Their great deeds that were

to adorn the future years. But into the dirge of Shimono Kani came

voices crying out of the heart strings of the gods, all sighing still

for the things that might not be. And the dirge and the voices crying,

go drifting away from the Path of Stars, away from the Midst of Things,

till they come twittering among the Worlds, like a great host of birds

that are lost by night. And every note is a life, and many notes become

caught up among the worlds to be entangled with flesh for a little

while before they pass again on their journey to the great Anthem that

roars at the End of Time. Shimono Kani hath given a voice to the wind

and added a sorrow to the sea. But when in lighted chambers after

feasting there arises the voice of the singer to please the King, then

is the soul of that singer crying aloud to his fellows from where he

stands chained to earth. And when at the sound of the singing the heart

of the King grows sad and his princes lament then they remember, though

knowing not that, they remember it, the sad face of Shimono Kani

sitting by his dead brethren, the elder gods, playing on the harp of

crying heart strings whereby he sent their souls among the worlds.





[Illustration: The Dirge of Shimono Kani]





“And when the music of one lute is lonely on the hills at night, then

one soul calleth to his brother souls—the notes of Shimono Kani’s dirge

which have not been caught among the worlds—and he knoweth not to whom

he calls or why, but knoweth only that minstrelsy is his only cry and

sendeth it out into the dark.



“But although in the prison houses of earth all memories must die, yet

as there sometimes clings to a prisoner’s feet some dust of the fields

wherein he was captured, so sometimes fragments of remembrance cling to

a man’s soul after it hath been taken to earth. Then a great minstrel

arises, and, weaving together the shreds of his memories, maketh some

melody such as the hand of Shimono Kani smites out of his harp; and

they that pass by say: ‘Hath there not been some such melody before?’

and pass on sad at heart for memories which are not.



“Therefore, O King, one day the great gates of thy palace shall lie

open for a procession wherein the King comes down to pass through a

people, lamenting with lute and drum; and on the same day a prison door

shall be opened by relenting hands, and one more lost note of Shimono

Kani’s dirge shall go back to swell his melody again.



“The dirge of Shimono Kani shall roll on till one day it shall come

with all its notes complete to overwhelm the Silence that sits at the

End of Things. Then shall Shimono Kani say to his brethren’s bones: The

things that might not be have at last become.’



“But very quiet shall be the bones of the gods of Old, and only Their

voices shall live which cried from the harp of heart strings, for the

things which might not be.”



VI



When the caravans, saying farewell to Zandara, set out across the waste

northwards towards Einandhu, they follow the desert track for seven

days before they come to water where Shubah Onath rises black out of

the waste, with a well at its foot and herbage on its summit. On this

rock a prophet hath his Temple and is called the Prophet of Journeys,

and hath carven in a southern window smiling along the camel track all

gods that are benignant to caravans.



There a traveller may learn by prophecy whether he shall accomplish the

ten days’ journey thence across the desert and so come to the white

city of Einandhu, or whether his bones shall lie with the bones of old

along the desert track.



No name hath the Prophet of Journeys, for none is needed in that desert

where no man calls nor ever a man answers.



Thus spake the Prophet of Journeys standing before the King:



“The journey of the King shall be an old journey pushed on apace.



“Many a year before the making of the moon thou camest down with dream

camels from the City without a name that stands beyond all the stars.

And then began thy journey over the Waste of Nought, and thy dream

camel bore thee well when those of certain of thy fellow travellers

fell down in the Waste and were covered over by the silence and were

turned again to nought; and those travellers when their dream camels

fell, having nothing to carry them further over the Waste, were lost

beyond and never found the earth. These are those men that might have

been but were not. And all about thee fluttered the myriad hours

travelling in great swarms across the Waste of Nought.



“How many centuries passed across the cities while thou wast making thy

journey none may reckon, for there is no time in the Waste of Nought,

but only the hours fluttering earthwards from beyond to do the work of

Time. At last the dream-borne travellers saw far off a green place

gleaming and made haste towards it and so came to Earth. And there, O

King, ye rest for a little while, thou and those that came with thee,

making an encampment upon earth before journeying on. There the

swarming hours alight, settling on every blade of grass and tree, and

spreading over your tents and devouring all things, and at last bending

your very tent poles with their weight and wearying you.



“Behind the encampment in the shadow of the tents lurks a dark figure

with a nimble sword, having the name of Time. This is he that hath

called the hours from beyond and he it is that is their master, and it

is his work that the hours do as they devour all green things upon the

earth and tatter the tents and weary all the travellers. As each of the

hours does the work of Time, Time smites him with his nimble sword as

soon as his work is done, and the hour falls severed to the dust with

his bright wings scattered, as a locust cut asunder by the scimitar of

a skillful swordsman.



“One by one, O King, with a stir in the camp, and the folding up of the

tents one by one, the travellers shall push on again on the journey

begun so long before out of the City without a name to the place where

dream camels go, striding free through the Waste. So into the Waste, O

King, thou shalt set forth ere long, perhaps to renew friendships begun

during thy short encampment upon earth.



“Other green places thou shalt meet in the Waste and thereon shalt

encamp again until driven thence by the hours. What prophet shall

relate how many journeys thou shalt make or how many encampments? But

at last thou shalt come to the place of The Resting of Camels, and

there shall gleaming cliffs that are named The Ending of Journeys lift

up out of the Waste of Nought, Nought at their feet, Nought laying wide

before them, with only the glint of worlds far off to illumine the

Waste. One by one, on tired dream camels, the travellers shall come in,

and going up the pathway through the cliff in that land of The Resting

of Camels shall come on The City of Ceasing. There, the dream-wrought

pinnacles and the spires that are builded of men’s hopes shall rise up

real before thee, seen only hitherto as a mirage in the Waste.



“So far the swarming hours may not come, and far away among the tents

shall stand the dark figure with the nimble sword. But in the

scintillant streets, under the song-built abodes of the last of cities,

thy journey, O King, shall end.”



VII



In the valley beyond Sidono there lies a garden of poppies, and where

the poppies’ heads are all a-swing with summer breezes that go up the

valley there lies a path well strewn with ocean shells. Over Sidono’s

summit the birds come streaming to the lake that lies in the valley of

the garden, and behind them rises the sun sending Sidono’s shadow as

far as the edge of the lake. And down the path of many ocean shells

when they begin to gleam in the sun, every morning walks an aged man

clad in a silken robe with strange devices woven. A little temple where

the old man lives stands at the edge of the path. None worship there,

for Zornadhu, the old prophet, hath forsaken men to walk among his

poppies.



For Zornadhu hath failed to understand the purport of Kings and cities

and the moving up and down of many people to the tune of the clinking

of gold. Therefore hath Zornadhu gone far away from the sound of cities

and from those that are ensnared thereby, and beyond Sidono’s mountain

hath come to rest where there are neither kings nor armies nor

bartering for gold, but only the heads of the poppies that sway in the

wind together and the birds that fly from Sidono to the lake, and then

the sunrise over Sidono’s summit; and afterwards the flight of birds

out of the lake and over Sidono again, and sunset behind the valley,

and high over lake and garden the stars that know not cities. There

Zornadhu lives in his garden of poppies with Sidono standing between

him and the whole world of men; and when the wind blowing athwart the

valley sways the heads of the tall poppies against the Temple wall, the

old prophet says: “The flowers are all praying, and lo! they be nearer

to the gods than men.”



But the heralds of the King coming after many days of travel to Sidono

perceived the garden valley. By the lake they saw the poppy garden

gleaming round and small like a sunrise over water on a misty morning

seen by some shepherd from the hills. And descending the bare mountain

for three days they came to the gaunt pines, and ever between the tall

trunks came the glare of the poppies that shone from the garden valley.

For a whole day they travelled through the pines. That night a cold

wind came up the garden valley crying against the poppies. Low in his

Temple, with a song of exceeding grief, Zornadhu in the morning made a

dirge for the passing of poppies, because in the night time there had

fallen petals that might not return or ever come again into the garden

valley. Outside the Temple on the path of ocean shells the heralds

halted, and read the names and honours of the King; and from the Temple

came the voice of Zornadhu still singing his lament. But they took him

from his garden because of the King’s command, and down his gleaming

path of ocean shells and away up Sidono, and left the Temple empty with

none to lament when silken poppies died. And the will of the wind of

the autumn was wrought upon the poppies, and the heads of the poppies

that rose from the earth went down to the earth again, as the plume of

a warrior smitten in a heathen fight far away, where there are none to

lament him. Thus out of his land of flowers went Zornadhu and came

perforce into the lands of men, and saw cities, and in the city’s midst

stood up before the King.



And the King said:



“Zornadhu, what of the journey of the King and of the princes and the

people that shall meet me?”



Zornadhu answered:



“I know nought of Kings, but in the night time the poppy made his

journey a little before dawn. Thereafter the wildfowl came as is their

wont over Sidono’s summit, and the sun rising behind them gleamed upon

Sidono, and all the flowers of the lake awoke. And the bee passing up

and down the garden went droning to other poppies, and the flowers of

the lake, they that had known the poppy, knew him no more. And the

sun’s rays slanting from Sidono’s crest lit still a garden valley where

one poppy waved his petals to the dawn no more. And I, O King, that

down a path of gleaming ocean shells walk in the morning, found not,

nor have since found, that poppy again, that hath gone on the journey

whence there is not returning, out of my garden valley. And I, O King,

made a dirge to cry beyond that valley and the poppies bowed their

heads; but there is no cry nor no lament that may adjure the life to

return again to a flower that grew in a garden once and hereafter is

not.



“Unto what place the lives of poppies have gone no man shall truly say.

Sure it is that to that place are only outward tracks. Only it may be

that when a man dreams at evening in a garden where heavily the scent

of poppies hangs in the air, when the winds have sunk, and far away the

sound of a lute is heard on lonely hills, as he dreams of

silken-scarlet poppies that once were a-swing together in the gardens

of his youth, the lives of those old lost poppies shall return, living

again in his dream. _So there may dream the gods._ And through the

dreams of some divinity reclining in tinted fields above the morning we

may haply pass again, although our bodies have long swirled up and down

the world with other dust. In these strange dreams our lives may be

again, all in the centre of our hopes, rejoicings and laments, until

above the morning the gods wake to go about their work, haply to

remember still Their idle dreams, haply to dream them all again in the

stillness when shines the starlight of the gods.”



VIII



Then said the King: “I like not these strange journeys nor this faint

wandering through the dreams of gods like the shadow of a weary camel

that may not rest when the sun is low. The gods that have made me to

love the earth’s cool woods and dancing streams do ill to send me into

the starry spaces that I love not, with my soul still peering earthward

through the eternal years, as a beggar who once was noble staring from

the street at lighted halls. For wherever the gods may send me I shall

be as the gods have made me, a creature loving the green fields of

earth.



“Now if there stand one prophet here that hath the ear of those too

splendid gods that stride above the glories of the orient sky, tell

them that there is on earth one King in the land called Zarkandhu to

the south of the opal mountains, who would fain tarry among the many

gardens of earth, and would leave to other men the splendours that the

gods shall give the dead above the twilight that surrounds the stars.”



Then spake Yamen, prophet of the Temple of Obin that stands on the

shores of a great lake, facing east. Yamen said: “I pray oft to the

gods who sit above the twilight behind the east. When the clouds are

heavy and red at sunset, or when there is boding of thunder or eclipse,

then I pray not, lest my prayers be scattered and beaten earthward. But

when the sun sets in a tranquil sky, pale green or azure, and the light

of his farewells stays long upon lonely hills, then I send forth my

prayers to flutter upward to gods that are surely smiling, and the gods

hear my prayers. But, O King, boons sought out of due time from the

gods are never wholly to be desired, and, if They should grant to thee

to tarry on the earth, old age would trouble thee with burdens more and

more till thou wouldst become the driven slave of the hours in fetters

that none may break.”



The King said: “They that have devised this burden of age may surely

stay it, pray therefore on the calmest evening of the year to the gods

above the twilight that I may tarry always on the earth and always

young, while over my head the scourges of the gods pass and alight

not.”



Then answered Yamen: “The King hath commanded, yet among the blessings

of the gods there always cries a curse. The great princes that make

merry with the King, who tell of the great deeds that the King wrought

in the former time, shall one by one grow old. And thou, O King, seated

at the feast crying, ‘make merry’ and extolling the former time shall

find about thee white heads nodding in sleep, and men that are

forgetting the former time. Then one by one the names of those that

sported with thee once called by the gods, one by one the names of the

singers that sing the songs thou lovest called by the gods, lastly of

those that chased the grey boar by night and took him in Orghoom

river—only the King. Then a new people that have not known the old

deeds of the King nor fought and chased with him, who dare not make

merry with the King as did his long dead princes. And all the while

those princes that are dead growing dearer and greater in thy memory,

and all the while the men that served thee then growing more small to

thee. And all the old things fading and new things arising which are

not as the old things were, the world changing yearly before thine eyes

and the gardens of thy childhood overgrown. Because thy childhood was

in the olden years thou shalt love the olden years, but ever the new

years shall overthrow them and their customs, and not the will of a

King may stay the changes that the gods have planned for all the

customs of old. Ever thou shalt say ‘This was not so,’ and ever the new

custom shall prevail even against a King. When thou hast made merry a

thousand times thou shalt grow tired of making merry. At last thou

shalt become weary of the chase, and still old age shall not come near

to thee to stifle desires that have been too oft fulfilled; then, O

King, thou shalt be a hunter yearning for the chase but with nought to

pursue that hath not been oft overcome. Old age shall come not to bury

thine ambitions in a time when there is nought for thee to aspire to

any more. Experience of many centuries shall make thee wise but hard

and very sad, and thou shalt be a mind apart from thy fellows and curse

them all for fools, and they shall not perceive thy wisdom because thy

thoughts are not their thoughts and the gods that they have made are

not the gods of the olden time. No solace shall thy wisdom bring thee

but only an increasing knowledge that thou knowest nought, and thou

shalt feel as a wise man in a world of fools, or else as a fool in a

world of wise men, when all men feel so sure and ever thy doubts

increase. When all that spake with thee of thine old deeds are dead,

those that saw them not shall speak of them again to thee; till one

speaking to thee of thy deeds of valour add more than even a man should

when speaking to a King, and thou shalt suddenly doubt whether these

great deeds were; and there shall be none to tell thee, only the echoes

of the voices of the gods still singing in thine ears when long ago

They called the princes that were thy friends. And thou shalt hear the

knowledge of the olden time most wrongly told and afterwards forgotten.

Then many prophets shall arise claiming discovery of that old

knowledge. Then thou shalt find that seeking knowledge is vain, as the

chase is vain, as making merry is vain, as all things are vain. One day

thou shalt find that it is vain to be a King. Greatly then will the

acclamations of the people weary thee, till the time when people grow

aweary of Kings. Then thou shalt know that thou hast been uprooted from

thine olden time and set to live in uncongenial years, and jests all

new to royal ears shall smite thee on the head like hailstones, when

thou hast lost thy crown, when those to whose grandsires thou hadst

granted to bring them as children to kiss the feet of the King shall

mock at thee because thou hast not learnt to barter with gold.



“Not all the marvels of the future time shall atone to thee for those

old memories that glow warmer and brighter every year as they recede

into the ages that the gods have gathered. And always dreaming of thy

long dead princes and of the great Kings of other kingdoms in the olden

time thou shalt fail to see the grandeur to which a hurrying jesting

people shall attain in that kingless age. Lastly, O King, thou shalt

perceive men changing in a way that thou shalt not comprehend, knowing

what thou canst not know, till thou shalt discover that these are men

no more and a new race holds dominion over the earth whose forefathers

were men. These shall speak to thee no more as they hurry upon a quest

that thou shalt never understand, and thou shalt know that thou canst

no longer take thy part in shaping destinies, but in a world of cities

only pine for air and the waving grass again and the sound of a wind in

trees. Then even this shall end with the shapes of the gods in the

darkness gathering all lives but thine, when the hills shall fling up

earth’s long stored heat back to the heavens again, when earth shall be

old and cold, with nothing alive upon it but one King.”



Then said the King: “Pray to those hard gods still, for those that have

loved the earth with all its gardens and woods and singing streams will

love earth still when it is old and cold and with all its gardens gone

and all the purport of its being failed and nought but memories.”



IX



Then spake Paharn, a prophet of the land of Hurn.



And Paharn said:



“There was one man that knew, but he stands not here.”



And the King said:



“Is he further than my heralds might travel in the night if they went

upon fleet horses?”



And the prophet answered:



“He is no further than thy heralds may well travel in the night, but

further than they may return from in all the years. Out of this city

there goes a valley wandering through all the world and opens out at

last on the green land of Hurn. On the one side in the distance gleams

the sea, and on the other side a forest, black and ancient, darkens the

fields of Hurn; beyond the forest and the sea there is no more, saving

the twilight and beyond that the gods. In the mouth of the valley

sleeps the village of Rhistaun.



“Here I was born, and heard the murmur of the flocks and herds, and saw

the tall smoke standing between the sky and the still roofs of

Rhistaun, and learned that men might not go into the dark forest, and

that beyond the forest and the sea was nought saving the twilight, and

beyond that the gods. Often there came travellers from the world all

down the winding valley, and spake with strange speech in Rhistaun and

returned again up the valley going back to the world. Sometimes with

bells and camels and men running on foot, Kings came down the valley

from the world, but always the travellers returned by the valley again

and none went further than the land of Hurn.



“And Kithneb also was born in the land of Hurn and tended the flocks

with me, but Kithneb would not care to listen to the murmur of the

flocks and herds and see the tall smoke standing between the roofs and

the sky, but needed to know how far from Hurn it was that the world met

the twilight, and how far across the twilight sat the gods.



“And often Kithneb dreamed as he tended the flocks and herds, and when

others slept he would wander near to the edge of the forest wherein men

might not go. And the elders of the land of Hurn reproved Kithneb when

he dreamed; yet Kithneb was still as other men and mingled with his

fellows until the day of which I will tell thee, O King. For Kithneb

was aged about a score of years, and he and I were sitting near the

flocks, and he gazed long at the point where the dark forest met the

sea at the end of the land of Hurn. But when night drove the twilight

down under the forest we brought the flocks together to Rhistaun, and I

went up the street between the houses to see four princes that had come

down the valley from the world, and they were clad in blue and scarlet

and wore plumes upon their heads, and they gave us in exchange for our

sheep some gleaming stones which they told us were of great value on

the word of princes. And I sold them three sheep, and Darniag sold them

eight.



“But Kithneb came not with the others to the market place where the

four princes stood, but went alone across the fields to the edge of the

forest.



“And it was upon the next morning that the strange thing befell

Kithneb; for I saw him in the morning coming from the fields, and I

hailed him with the shepherd’s cry wherewith we shepherds call to one

another, and he answered not. Then I stopped and spake to him, and

Kithneb said not a word till I became angry and left him.



“Then we spake together concerning Kithneb, and others had hailed him,

and he had not answered them, but to one he had said that he had heard

the voices of the gods speaking beyond the forest and so would never

listen more to the voices of men.



“Then we said: ‘Kithneb is mad,’ and none hindered him.



“Another took his place among the flocks, and Kithneb sat in the

evenings by the edge of the forest on the plain, alone.



“So Kithneb spake to none for many days, but when any forced him to

speak he said that every evening he heard the gods when they came to

sit in the forest from over the twilight and sea, and that he would

speak no more with men.



“But as the months went by, men in Rhistaun came to look on Kithneb as

a prophet, and we were wont to point to him when strangers came down

the valley from the world, saying:



“‘Here in the land of Hurn we have a prophet such as you have not among

your cities, for he speaks at evening with the gods.’



“A year had passed over the silence of Kithneb when he came to me and

spake. And I bowed before him because we believed that he spake among

the gods. And Kithneb said:



“‘I will speak to thee before the end because I am most lonely. For how

may I speak again with men and women in the little streets of Rhistaun

among the houses, when I have heard the voices of the gods singing

above the twilight? But I am more lonely than ever Rhistaun wots of,

for this I tell thee, _when I hear the gods I know not what They say_.

Well indeed I know the voice of each, for ever calling me away from

contentment; well I know Their voices as they call to my soul and

trouble it; I know by Their tone when They rejoice, and I know when

They are sad, for even the gods feel sadness. I know when over fallen

cities of the past, and the curved white bones of heroes They sing the

dirges of the gods’ lament. But alas! Their words I know not, and the

wonderful strains of the melody of Their speech beat on my soul and

pass away unknown.



“‘Therefore I travelled from the land of Hurn till I came to the house

of the prophet Arnin-Yo, and told him that I sought to find the meaning

of the gods; and Arnin-Yo told me to ask the shepherds concerning all

the gods, for what the shepherds knew it was meet for a man to know,

and, beyond that, knowledge turned into trouble.



“‘But I told Arnin-Yo that I had heard myself the voices of the gods

and knew that They were there beyond the twilight and so could never

more bow down to the gods that the shepherds made from the red clay

which they scooped with their hands out of the hillside.



“‘Then said Arnin-Yo to me:



“‘Natheless forget that thou hast heard the gods and bow down again to

the gods of the red clay that the shepherds make, and find thereby the

ease that the shepherds find, and at last die, remembering devoutly the

gods of the red clay that the shepherds scooped with their hands out of

the hill. For the gifts of the gods that sit beyond the twilight and

smile at the gods of clay, are neither ease nor contentment.”



“‘And I said:



“‘The god that my mother made out of the red clay that she had got

from the hill, fashioning it with many arms and eyes as she sang me

songs of its power, and told me stories of its mystic birth, this god

is lost and broken; and ever in my ears is ringing the melody of the

gods.”



“‘And Arnin-Yo said:



“‘If thou wouldst still seek knowledge know that only those that come

behind the gods may clearly know their meaning. And this thou canst

only do by taking ship and putting out to sea from the land of Hurn and

sailing up the coast towards the forest. There the sea cliffs turn to

the left or southward, and full upon them beats the twilight from over

the sea, and there thou mayest come round behind the forest. Here where

the world’s edge mingles with the twilight the gods come in the

evening, and if thou canst come behind Them thou shalt hear Their

voices clear, beating full seaward and filling all the twilight with

sound of song, and thou shalt know the meaning of the gods. But where

the cliffs turn southward there sits behind the gods Brimdono, the

oldest whirlpool in the sea, roaring to guard his masters. Him the gods

have chained for ever to the floor of the twilit sea to guard the door

of the forest that lieth above the cliffs. Here, then, if thou canst

hear the voices of the gods as thou hast said, thou wilt know their

meaning clear, but this will profit thee little when Brimdono drags

thee down and all thy ship.’”



“Thus spake Kithneb to me.



“But I said:



“‘O Kithneb, forget those whirlpool-guarded gods beyond the forest, and

if thy small god be lost thou shalt worship with me the small god that

my mother made. Thousands of years ago he conquered cities but is not

any longer an angry god. Pray to him, Kithneb, and he shall bring thee

comfort and increase to thy flocks and a mild spring, and at the last a

quiet ending for thy days.’



“But Kithneb heeded not, and only bade me find a fisher ship and men to

row it. So on the next day we put forth from the land of Hurn in a boat

that the fisher folk use. And with us came four of the fisher folk who

rowed the boat while I held the rudder, but Kithneb sat and spake not

in the prow. And we rowed westward up the coast till we came at evening

where the cliffs turned southward and the twilight gleamed upon them

and the sea.



“There we turned southwards and saw at once Brimdono. And as a man

tears the purple cloak of a king slain in battle to divide it with

other warriors,—Brimdono tore the sea. And ever around and around him

with a gnarled hand Brimdono whirled the sail of some adventurous ship,

the trophy of some calamity wrought in his greed for shipwreck long ago

where he sat to guard his masters from all who fare on the sea. And

ever one far-reaching empty hand swung up and down so that we durst go

no nearer.



“Only Kithneb neither saw Brimdono nor heard his roar, and when we

would go no further bade us lower a small boat with oars out of the

ship. Into this boat Kithneb descended, not heeding words from us, and

onward rowed alone. A cry of triumph over ships and men Brimdono

uttered before him, but Kithneb’s eyes were turned toward the forest as

he came behind the gods. Upon his face the twilight beat full from the

haunts of evening to illumine the smiles that grew about his eyes as he

came behind the gods. Him that had found the gods above Their twilit

cliffs, him that had heard Their voices close at last and knew Their

meaning clear, him, from the cheerless world with its doubtings and

prophets that lie, from all hidden meanings, where truth rang clear at

last, Brimdono took.”



But when Paharn ceased to speak, in the King’s ears the roar of

Brimdono exulting over ancient triumphs and the whelming of ships

seemed still to ring.



X



Then Mohontis spake, the hermit prophet, who lived in the deep

untravelled woods that seclude Lake Ilana.



“I dreamed that to the west of all the seas I saw by vision the mouth

of Munra-O, guarded by golden gates, and through the bars of the gates

that guard the mysterious river of Munra-O I saw the flashes of golden

barques, wherein the gods went up and down, and to and fro through the

evening dusk. And I saw that Munra-O was a river of dreams such as came

through remembered gardens in the night, to charm our infancy as we

slept beneath the sloping gables of the houses of long ago. And Munra-O

rolled down her dreams from the unknown inner land and slid them under

the golden gates and out into the waste, unheeding sea, till they beat

far off upon low-lying shores and murmured songs of long ago to the

islands of the south, or shouted tumultuous paeans to the Northern

crags; or cried forlornly against rocks where no one came, dreams that

might not be dreamed.



“Many gods there be, that through the dusk of an evening in the summer

go up and down this river. There I saw, in a high barque all of gold,

gods of the pomp of cities; there I saw gods of splendour, in boats

bejewelled to the keels; gods of magnificence and gods of power. I saw

the dark ships and the glint of steel of the gods whose trade was war,

and I heard the melody of the bells of silver arow in the rigging of

harpstrings as the gods of melody went sailing through the dusk on the

river of Munra-O. Wonderful river of Munra-O! I saw a grey ship with

sails of the spider’s web all lit with dewdrop lanterns, and on its

prow was a scarlet cock with its wings spread far and wide when the

gods of the dawn sailed also on Munra-O.



“Down this river it is the wont of the gods to carry the souls of men

eastward to where the world in the distance faces on Munra-O. Then I

knew that when the gods of the Pride of Power and gods of the Pomp of

Cities went down the river in their tall gold ships to take earthward

other souls, swiftly adown the river and between the ships had gone in

this boat of birch bark the god Tarn, the hunter, bearing my soul to

the world. And I know now that he came down the stream in the dusk

keeping well to the middle, and that he moved silently and swiftly

among the ships, wielding a twin-bladed oar. I remember, now, the

yellow gleaming of the great boats of the gods of the Pomp of Cities,

and the huge prow above me of the gods of the Pride of Power, when

Tarn, dipping his right blade into the river, lifted his left blade

high, and the drops gleamed and fell. Thus Tarn the hunter took me to

the world that faces across the sea of the west on the gate of Munra-O.

And so it was that there grew upon me the glamour of the hunt, though I

had forgotten Tarn, and took me into mossy places and into dark woods,

and I became the cousin of the wolf and looked into the lynx’s eyes and

knew the bear; and the birds called to me with half-remembered notes,

and there grew in me a deep love of great rivers and of all western

seas, and a distrust of cities, and all the while I had forgotten Tarn.



“I know not what high galleon shall come for thee, O King, nor what

rowers, clad with purple, shall row at the bidding of gods when thou

goest back with pomp to the river of Munra-O. But for me Tarn waits

where the Seas of the West break over the edge of the world, and, as

the years pass over me and the love of the chase sinks low, and as the

glamour of the dark woods and mossy places dies down in my soul, ever

louder and louder lap the ripples against the canoe of birch bark

where, holding his twin-bladed oar, Tarn waits.



“But when my soul hath no more knowledge of the woods nor kindred any

longer with the creatures of the dark, and when all that Tarn hath

given it shall be lost, then Tarn shall take me back over the western

seas, where all the remembered years lie floating idly aswing with the

ebb and flow, to bring me again to the river of Munra-O. Far up that

river we shall haply chase those creatures whose eyes are peering in

the night as they prowl around the world, for Tarn was ever a hunter.”



XI



Then Ulf spake, the prophet who in Sistrameides lives in a temple

anciently dedicated to the gods. Rumour hath guessed that there the

gods walked once some time towards evening. But Time whose hand is

against the temples of the gods hath dealt harshly with it and

overturned its pillars and set upon its ruins his sign and seal: now

Ulf dwells there alone. And Ulf said, “There sets, O King, a river

outward from earth which meets with a mighty sea whose waters roll

through space and fling their billows on the shores of every star.

These are the river and the sea of the Tears of Men.”



And the King said:



“Men have not written of this sea.”



And the prophet answered:



“Have not tears enough burst in the night time out of sleeping cities?

Have not the sorrows of 10,000 homes sent streams into this river when

twilight fell and it was still and there was none to hear? Have there

not been hopes, and were they all fulfilled? Have there not been

conquests and bitter defeats? And have not flowers when spring was over

died in the gardens of many children? Tears enough, O King, tears

enough have gone down out of earth to make such a sea; and deep it is

and wide and the gods know it and it flings its spray on the shores of

all the stars. Down this river and across this sea thou shalt fare in a

ship of sighs and all around thee over the sea shall fly the prayers of

men which rise on white wings higher than their sorrows. Sometimes

perched in the rigging, sometimes crying around thee, shall go the

prayers that availed not to stay thee in Zarkandhu. Far over the

waters, and on the wings of the prayers beats the light of an

inaccessible star. No hand hath touched it, none hath journeyed to it,

it hath no substance, it is only a light, it is the star of Hope, and

it shines far over the sea and brightens the world. It is nought but a

light, but the gods gave it.



“Led only by the light of this star the myriad prayers that thou shalt

see all around thee fly to the Hall of the gods.



“Sighs shall waft thy ship of sighs over the sea of Tears. Thou shalt

pass by islands of laughter and lands of song lying low in the sea, and

all of them drenched with tears flung over their rocks by the waves of

the sea all driven by the sighs.



“But at last thou shalt come with the prayers of men to the great Hall

of the gods where the chairs of the gods are carved of onyx grouped

round the golden throne of the eldest of the gods. And there, O King,

hope not to find the gods, but reclining upon the golden throne wearing

a cloak of his master’s thou shalt see the figure of Time with blood

upon his hands, and loosely dangling from his fingers a dripping sword,

and spattered with blood but empty shall stand the onyx chairs.



“There he sits on his master’s throne dangling idly his sword, or with

it flicking cruelly at the prayers of men that lie in a great heap

bleeding at his feet.



“For a while, O King, the gods had sought to solve the riddles of Time,

for a while They made him Their slave, and Time smiled and obeyed his

masters, for a while, O King, for a while. He that hath spared nothing

hath not spared the gods, nor yet shall he spare thee.”



Then the King spake dolefully in the Hall of Kings, and said:



“May I not find at last the gods, and must it be that I may not look in

Their faces at the last to see whether They be kindly? They that have

sent me on my earthward journey I would greet on my returning, if not

as a King coming again to his own city, yet as one who having been

ordered had obeyed, and obeying had merited something of those for whom

he toiled. I would look Them in Their faces, O prophet, and ask Them

concerning many things and would know the wherefore of much. I had

hoped, O prophet, that those gods that had smiled upon my childhood,

Whose voices stirred at evening in gardens when I was young, would hold

dominion still when at last I came to seek Them. O prophet, if this is

not to be, make you a great dirge for my childhood’s gods and fashion

silver bells and, setting them mostly a-swing amidst such trees as grew

in the garden of my childhood, sing you this dirge in the dusk: and

sing it when the low moth flies up and down and the bat first comes

peering from her home, sing it when white mists come rising from the

river, when smoke is pale and grey, while flowers are yet closing, ere

voices are yet hushed, sing it while all things yet lament the day, or

ever the great lights of heaven come blazing forth and night with her

splendours takes the place of day. For, if the old gods die, let us

lament Them or ever new knowledge comes, while all the world still

shudders at Their loss.



“For at the last, O prophet, what is left? Only the gods of my

childhood dead, and only Time striding large and lonely through the

spaces, chilling the moon and paling the light of stars and scattering

earthward out of both his hands the dust of forgetfulness over the

fields of heroes and smitten Temples of the older gods.”



But when the other prophets heard with what doleful words the King

spake in the Hall they all cried out:



“It is not as Ulf has said but as I have said—and I.”



Then the King pondered long, not speaking. But down in the city in a

street between the houses stood grouped together they that were wont to

dance before the King, and they that had borne his wine in jewelled

cups. Long they had tarried in the city hoping that the King might

relent, and once again regard them with kindly faces calling for wine

and song. The next morning they were all to set out in search of some

new Kingdom, and they were peering between the houses and up the long

grey street to see for the last time the palace of King Ebalon; and

Pattering Leaves, the dancer, cried:



“Not any more, not any more at all shall we drift up the carven hall to

dance before the King. He that now watches the magic of his prophets

will behold no more the wonder of the dance, and among ancient

parchments, strange and wise, he shall forget the swirl of drapery when

we swing together through the Dance of the Myriad Steps.”



And with her were Silvern Fountain and Summer Lightning and Dream of

the Sea, each lamenting that they should dance no more to please the

eyes of the King.



And Intahn who had carried at the banquet for fifty years the goblet of

the King set with its four sapphires each as large as an eye, said as

he spread his hands towards the palace making the sign of farewell:



“Not all the magic of prophecy nor yet foreseeing nor perceiving may

equal the power of wine. Through the small door in the King’s Hall one

goes by one hundred steps and many sloping corridors into the cool of

the earth where lies a cavern vaster than the Hall. Therein, curtained

by the spider, repose the casks of wine that are wont to gladden the

hearts of the Kings of Zarkandhu. In islands far to the eastward the

vine, from whose heart this wine was long since wrung, hath climbed

aloft with many a clutching finger and beheld the sea and ships of the

olden time and men since dead, and gone down into the earth again and

been covered over with weeds. And green with the damp of years there

lie three casks that a city gave not up until all her defenders were

slain and her houses fired; and ever to the soul of that wine is added

a more ardent fire as ever the years go by. Thither it was my pride to

go before a banquet in the olden years, and coming up to bear in the

sapphire goblet the fire of the elder Kings and to watch the King’s eye

flash and his face grow nobler and more like his sires as he drank the

gleaming wine.



“And now the King seeks wisdom from his prophets while all the glory of

the past and all the clattering splendour of today grows old, far down,

forgotten beneath his feet.”



And when he ceased the cupbearers and the women that danced looked long

in silence at the palace. Then one by one all made the farewell sign

before they turned to go, and as they did this a herald unseen in the

dark was speeding towards them.



After a long silence the King spake:



“Prophets of my Kingdom,” he said, “you have not prophesied alike, and

the words of each prophet condemn his fellows’ words so that wisdom may

not be discovered among prophets. But I command that none in my Kingdom

shall doubt that the earliest King of Zarkandhu stored wine beneath

this palace before the building of the city or ever the palace arose,

and I shall cause commands to be uttered for the making of a banquet at

once within this Hall, so that ye shall perceive that the power of my

wine is greater than all your spells, and dancing more wondrous than

prophecy.”



The dancers and the winebearers were summoned back, and as the night

wore on a banquet was spread and all the prophets bidden to be seated,

Samahn, Ynath, Monith, Ynar Thun, the prophet of Journeys, Zornadhu,

Yamen, Paharn, Ilana, Ulf, and one that had not spoken nor yet revealed

his name, and who wore his prophet’s cloak across his face.



And the prophets feasted as they were commanded and spake as other men

spake, save he whose face was hidden, who neither ate nor spake. Once

he put out his hand from under his cloak and touched a blossom among

the flowers upon the table and the blossom fell.



And Pattering Leaves came in and danced again, and the King smiled, and

Pattering Leaves was happy though she had not the wisdom of the

prophets. And in and out, in and out, in and out among the columns of

the Hall went Summer Lightning in the maze of the dance. And Silvern

Fountain bowed before the King and danced and danced and bowed again,

and old Intahn went to and fro from the cavern to the King gravely

through the midst of the dancers but with kindly eyes, and when the

King had often drunk of the old wine of the elder Kings he called for

Dream of the Sea and bade her sing. And Dream of the Sea came through

the arches and sang of an island builded by magic out of pearls, that

lay set in a ruby sea, and how it lay far off and under the south,

guarded by jagged reefs whereon the sorrows of the world were wrecked

and never came to the island. And how a low sunset always reddened the

sea and lit the magic isle and never turned to night, and how someone

sang always and endlessly to lure the soul of a King who might by

enchantment pass the guarding reefs to find rest on the pearl island

and not be troubled more, but only see sorrows on the outer reef

battered and broken. Then Soul of the South rose up and sang a song of

a fountain that ever sought to reach the sky and was ever doomed to

fall to the earth again until at last….





[Illustration: Pattering Leaves Danced]





Then whether it was the art of Pattering Leaves or the song of Dream of

the Sea, or whether it was the fire of the wine of the elder Kings,

Ebalon bade farewell kindly to the prophets when morning paled the

stars. Then along the torchlit corridors the King went to his chamber,

and having shut the door in the empty room, beheld suddenly a figure

wearing the cloak of a prophet; and the King perceived that it was he

whose face was hidden at the banquet, who had not revealed his name.



And the King said:



“Art thou, too, a prophet?”



And the figure answered:



“I am a prophet.”



And the King said: “Knowest _thou_ aught concerning the journey of the

King?” And the figure answered: “I know, but have never said.”



And the King said: “Who art thou that knowest so much and has not told

it?”



And he answered:



“I am _The End_.”



Then the cloaked figure strode away from the palace; and the King,

unseen by the guards, followed upon his journey.



THE END









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIME AND THE GODS ***



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will

be renamed.



Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright

law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the

United States without permission and without paying copyright

royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm

concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for

copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very

easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation

of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project

Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may

do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected

by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark

license, especially commercial redistribution.



START: FULL LICENSE



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK



To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free

distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work

(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project

Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full

Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at

www.gutenberg.org/license.



Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic works



1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to

and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property

(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all

the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or

destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your

possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a

Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound

by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the

person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph

1.E.8.



1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be

used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who

agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few

things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See

paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this

agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.



1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the

Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection

of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual

works in the collection are in the public domain in the United

States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the

United States and you are located in the United States, we do not

claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,

displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as

all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope

that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting

free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm

works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the

Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily

comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the

same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when

you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern

what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are

in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,

check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this

agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,

distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any

other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no

representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any

country other than the United States.



1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:



1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other

immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear

prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work

on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the

phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,

performed, viewed, copied or distributed:



  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no

  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it

  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this

  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the

  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where

  you are located before using this eBook.



1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is

derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not

contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the

copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in

the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are

redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project

Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply

either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or

obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm

trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted

with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution

must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any

additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms

will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works

posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the

beginning of this work.



1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm

License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.



1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this

electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without

prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with

active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project

Gutenberg-tm License.



1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including

any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access

to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format

other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official

version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website

(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense

to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means

of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain

Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the

full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.



1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works

unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

provided that:



* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from

  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method

  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed

  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has

  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project

  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid

  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are

  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty

  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project

  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg

  Literary Archive Foundation."



* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies

  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he

  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm

  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all

  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue

  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm

  works.



* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of

  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the

  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of

  receipt of the work.



* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free

  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.



1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than

are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing

from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of

the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set

forth in Section 3 below.



1.F.



1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable

effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread

works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project

Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may

contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate

or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other

intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or

other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or

cannot be read by your equipment.



1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right

of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project

Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal

fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT

LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE

PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE

TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE

LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR

INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH

DAMAGE.



1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a

defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can

receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a

written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you

received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium

with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you

with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in

lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person

or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second

opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If

the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing

without further opportunities to fix the problem.



1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO

OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT

LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.



1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied

warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of

damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement

violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the

agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or

limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or

unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the

remaining provisions.



1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the

trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone

providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in

accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the

production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,

including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of

the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this

or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or

additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any

Defect you cause.



Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm



Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of

computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It

exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations

from people in all walks of life.



Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the

assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's

goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will

remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure

and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future

generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see

Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at

www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit

501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the

state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal

Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification

number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by

U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.



The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,

Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up

to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website

and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact



Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation



Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without

widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of

increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be

freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest

array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations

($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt

status with the IRS.



The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating

charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United

States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a

considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up

with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations

where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND

DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular

state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate



While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we

have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition

against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who

approach us with offers to donate.



International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from

outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.



Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation

methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other

ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To

donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate



Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works



Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project

Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be

freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and

distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of

volunteer support.



Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed

editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in

the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not

necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper

edition.



Most people start at our website which has the main PG search

facility: www.gutenberg.org



This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,

including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to

subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.







﻿*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF WONDER ***









THE BOOK OF WONDER



BY

LORD DUNSANY







CONTENTS



  Preface

  The Bride of the Man-Horse

  Distressing Tale of Thangobrind The Jeweller

  The House of the Sphinx

  Probable Adventure of the Three Literary Men

  The Injudicious Prayers of Pombo the Idolater

  The Loot of Bombasharna

  Miss Cubbidge and the Dragon Of Romance

  The Quest of the Queen's Tears

  The Hoard of the Gibbelins

  How Nuth Would Have Practised His Art Upon the Gnoles

  How One Came, As Was Foretold, to the City Of Never

  The Coronation of Mr. Thomas Shap

  Chu-Bu and Sheemish

  The Wonderful Window

  Epilogue







PREFACE





Come with me, ladies and gentlemen who are in any wise weary of

London: come with me: and those that tire at all of the world we know:

for we have new worlds here.







THE BRIDE OF THE MAN-HORSE





In the morning of his two hundred and fiftieth year Shepperalk the

centaur went to the golden coffer, wherein the treasure of the

centaurs was, and taking from it the hoarded amulet that his father,

Jyshak, in the years of his prime, had hammered from mountain gold and

set with opals bartered from the gnomes, he put it upon his wrist, and

said no word, but walked from his mother's cavern. And he took with

him too that clarion of the centaurs, that famous silver horn, that in

its time had summoned to surrender seventeen cities of Man, and for

twenty years had brayed at star-girt walls in the Siege of

Tholdenblarna, the citadel of the gods, what time the centaurs waged

their fabulous war and were not broken by any force of arms, but

retreated slowly in a cloud of dust before the final miracle of the

gods that They brought in Their desperate need from Their ultimate

armoury. He took it and strode away, and his mother only sighed and

let him go.



She knew that today he would not drink at the stream coming down from

the terraces of Varpa Niger, the inner land of the mountains, that

today he would not wonder awhile at the sunset and afterwards trot

back to the cavern again to sleep on rushes pulled by rivers that know

not Man. She knew that it was with him as it had been of old with his

father, and with Goom the father of Jyshak, and long ago with the

gods. Therefore she only sighed and let him go.



But he, coming out from the cavern that was his home, went for the

first time over the little stream, and going round the corner of the

crags saw glittering beneath him the mundane plain. And the wind of

the autumn that was gilding the world, rushing up the slopes of the

mountain, beat cold on his naked flanks. He raised his head and

snorted.



"I am a man-horse now!" he shouted aloud; and leaping from crag to

crag he galloped by valley and chasm, by torrent-bed and scar of

avalanche, until he came to the wandering leagues of the plain, and

left behind him for ever the Athraminaurian mountains.



His goal was Zretazoola, the city of Sombelenë. What legend of

Sombelenë's inhuman beauty or of the wonder of her mystery had ever

floated over the mundane plain to the fabulous cradle of the centaurs'

race, the Athraminaurian mountains, I do not know. Yet in the blood of

man there is a tide, an old sea-current rather, that is somehow akin

to the twilight, which brings him rumours of beauty from however far

away, as driftwood is found at sea from islands not yet discovered:

and this spring-tide of current that visits the blood of man comes from

the fabulous quarter of his lineage, from the legendary, the old; it

takes him out to the woodlands, out to the hills; he listens to

ancient song. So it may be that Shepperalk's fabulous blood stirred in

those lonely mountains away at the edge of the world to rumours that

only the airy twilight knew and only confided secretly to the bat, for

Shepperalk was more legendary even than man. Certain it was that he

headed from the first for the city of Zretazoola, where Sombelenë in her

temple dwelt; though all the mundane plain, its rivers and mountains,

lay between Shepperalk's home and the city he sought.



When first the feet of the centaur touched the grass of that soft

alluvial earth he blew for joy upon the silver horn, he pranced and

caracoled, he gambolled over the leagues; pace came to him like a

maiden with a lamp, a new and beautiful wonder; the wind laughed as it

passed him. He put his head down low to the scent of the flowers, he

lifted it up to be nearer the unseen stars, he revelled through

kingdoms, took rivers in his stride; how shall I tell you, ye that

dwell in cities, how shall I tell you what he felt as he galloped? He

felt for strength like the towers of Bel-Narana; for lightness like

those gossamer palaces that the fairy-spider builds 'twixt heaven and

sea along the coasts of Zith; for swiftness like some bird racing up

from the morning to sing in some city's spires before daylight comes.

He was the sworn companion of the wind. For joy he was as a song; the

lightnings of his legendary sires, the earlier gods, began to mix with

his blood; his hooves thundered. He came to the cities of men, and all

men trembled, for they remembered the ancient mythical wars, and now

they dreaded new battles and feared for the race of man. Not by Clio

are these wars recorded; history does not know them, but what of that?

Not all of us have sat at historians' feet, but all have learned fable

and myth at their mothers' knees. And there were none that did not

fear strange wars when they saw Shepperalk swerve and leap along the

public ways. So he passed from city to city.



By night he lay down unpanting in the reeds of some marsh or a forest;

before dawn he rose triumphant, and hugely drank of some river in the

dark, and splashing out of it would trot to some high place to find

the sunrise, and to send echoing eastwards the exultant greetings of

his jubilant horn. And lo! the sunrise coming up from the echoes, and

the plains new-lit by the day, and the leagues spinning by like water

flung from a top, and that gay companion, the loudly laughing wind,

and men and the fears of men and their little cities; and, after that,

great rivers and waste spaces and huge new hills, and then new lands

beyond them, and more cities of men, and always the old companion, the

glorious wind. Kingdom by kingdom slipt by, and still his breath was

even. "It is a golden thing to gallop on good turf in one's youth,"

said the young man-horse, the centaur. "Ha, ha," said the wind of the

hills, and the winds of the plain answered.



Bells pealed in frantic towers, wise men consulted parchments,

astrologers sought of the portent from the stars, the aged made subtle

prophecies. "Is he not swift?" said the young. "How glad he is," said

children.



Night after night brought him sleep, and day after day lit his gallop,

till he came to the lands of the Athalonian men who live by the edges

of the mundane plain, and from them he came to the lands of legend

again such as those in which he was cradled on the other side of the

world, and which fringe the marge of the world and mix with the

twilight. And there a mighty thought came into his untired heart, for

he knew that he neared Zretazoola now, the city of Sombelenë.



It was late in the day when he neared it, and clouds coloured with

evening rolled low on the plain before him; he galloped on into their

golden mist, and when it hid from his eyes the sight of things, the

dreams in his heart awoke and romantically he pondered all those

rumours that used to come to him from Sombelenë, because of the

fellowship of fabulous things. She dwelt (said evening secretly to the

bat) in a little temple by a lone lakeshore. A grove of cypresses

screened her from the city, from Zretazoola of the climbing ways. And

opposite her temple stood her tomb, her sad lake-sepulchre with open

door, lest her amazing beauty and the centuries of her youth should

ever give rise to the heresy among men that lovely Sombelenë was

immortal: for only her beauty and her lineage were divine.



Her father had been half centaur and half god; her mother was the

child of a desert lion and that sphinx that watches the pyramids;--she

was more mystical than Woman.



Her beauty was as a dream, was as a song; the one dream of a lifetime

dreamed on enchanted dews, the one song sung to some city by a

deathless bird blown far from his native coasts by storm in Paradise.

Dawn after dawn on mountains of romance or twilight after twilight

could never equal her beauty; all the glow-worms had not the secret

among them nor all the stars of night; poets had never sung it nor

evening guessed its meaning; the morning envied it, it was hidden from

lovers.



She was unwed, unwooed.



The lions came not to woo her because they feared her strength, and

the gods dared not love her because they knew she must die.



This was what evening had whispered to the bat, this was the dream in

the heart of Shepperalk as he cantered blind through the mist. And

suddenly there at his hooves in the dark of the plain appeared the

cleft in the legendary lands, and Zretazoola sheltering in the cleft,

and sunning herself in the evening.



Swiftly and craftily he bounded down by the upper end of the cleft,

and entering Zretazoola by the outer gate which looks out sheer on the

stars, he galloped suddenly down the narrow streets. Many that rushed

out on to balconies as he went clattering by, many that put their

heads from glittering windows, are told of in olden song. Shepperalk

did not tarry to give greetings or to answer challenges from martial

towers, he was down through the earthward gateway like the thunderbolt

of his sires, and, like Leviathan who has leapt at an eagle, he surged

into the water between temple and tomb.



He galloped with half-shut eyes up the temple-steps, and, only seeing

dimly through his lashes, seized Sombelenë by the hair, undazzled as

yet by her beauty, and so haled her away; and, leaping with her over

the floorless chasm where the waters of the lake fall unremembered

away into a hole in the world, took her we know not where, to be her

slave for all centuries that are allowed to his race.



Three blasts he gave as he went upon that silver horn that is the

world-old treasure of the centaurs. These were his wedding bells.







DISTRESSING TALE OF THANGOBRIND THE JEWELLER





When Thangobrind the jeweller heard the ominous cough, he turned at

once upon that narrow way. A thief was he, of very high repute, being

patronized by the lofty and elect, for he stole nothing smaller than

the Moomoo's egg, and in all his life stole only four kinds of

stone--the ruby, the diamond, the emerald, and the sapphire; and, as

jewellers go, his honesty was great. Now there was a Merchant Prince

who had come to Thangobrind and had offered his daughter's soul for

the diamond that is larger than the human head and was to be found on

the lap of the spider-idol, Hlo-hlo, in his temple of Moung-ga-ling;

for he had heard that Thangobrind was a thief to be trusted.



Thangobrind oiled his body and slipped out of his shop, and went

secretly through byways, and got as far as Snarp, before anybody knew

that he was out on business again or missed his sword from its place

under the counter. Thence he moved only by night, hiding by day and

rubbing the edges of his sword, which he called Mouse because it was

swift and nimble. The jeweller had subtle methods of travelling;

nobody saw him cross the plains of Zid; nobody saw him come to Mursk

or Tlun. O, but he loved shadows! Once the moon peeping out

unexpectedly from a tempest had betrayed an ordinary jeweller; not so

did it undo Thangobrind: the watchman only saw a crouching shape that

snarled and laughed: "'Tis but a hyena," they said. Once in the city

of Ag one of the guardians seized him, but Thangobrind was oiled and

slipped from his hand; you scarcely heard his bare feet patter away.

He knew that the Merchant Prince awaited his return, his little eyes

open all night and glittering with greed; he knew how his daughter lay

chained up and screaming night and day. Ah, Thangobrind knew. And had

he not been out on business he had almost allowed himself one or two

little laughs. But business was business, and the diamond that he

sought still lay on the lap of Hlo-hlo, where it had been for the last

two million years since Hlo-hlo created the world and gave unto it all

things except that precious stone called Dead Man's Diamond. The jewel

was often stolen, but it had a knack of coming back again to the lap

of Hlo-hlo. Thangobrind knew this, but he was no common jeweller and

hoped to outwit Hlo-hlo, perceiving not the trend of ambition and lust

and that they are vanity.



How nimbly he threaded his way through the pits of Snood!--now like a

botanist, scrutinising the ground; now like a dancer, leaping from

crumbling edges. It was quite dark when he went by the towers of Tor,

where archers shoot ivory arrows at strangers lest any foreigner should

alter their laws, which are bad, but not to be altered by mere aliens.

At night they shoot by the sound of the strangers' feet. O, Thangobrind,

Thangobrind, was ever a jeweller like you! He dragged two stones behind

him by long cords, and at these the archers shot. Tempting indeed was

the snare that they set in Woth, the emeralds loose-set in the city's

gate; but Thangobrind discerned the golden cord that climbed the wall

from each and the weights that would topple upon him if he touched one,

and so he left them, though he left them weeping, and at last came to

Theth. There all men worship Hlo-hlo; though they are willing to believe

in other gods, as missionaries attest, but only as creatures of the

chase for the hunting of Hlo-hlo, who wears Their halos, so these people

say, on golden hooks along his hunting-belt. And from Theth he came to

the city of Moung and the temple of Moung-ga-ling, and entered and saw

the spider-idol, Hlo-hlo, sitting there with Dead Man's Diamond

glittering on his lap, and looking for all the world like a full moon,

but a full moon seen by a lunatic who had slept too long in its rays,

for there was in Dead Man's Diamond a certain sinister look and a boding

of things to happen that are better not mentioned here. The face of the

spider-idol was lit by that fatal gem; there was no other light. In

spite of his shocking limbs and that demoniac body, his face was serene

and apparently unconscious.



A little fear came into the mind of Thangobrind the jeweller, a

passing tremor--no more; business was business and he hoped for the

best. Thangobrind offered honey to Hlo-hlo and prostrated himself

before him. Oh, he was cunning! When the priests stole out of the

darkness to lap up the honey they were stretched senseless on the

temple floor, for there was a drug in the honey that was offered to

Hlo-hlo. And Thangobrind the jeweller picked Dead Man's Diamond up and

put it on his shoulder and trudged away from the shrine; and Hlo-hlo

the spider-idol said nothing at all, but he laughed softly as the

jeweller shut the door. When the priests awoke out of the grip of the

drug that was offered with the honey to Hlo-hlo, they rushed to a

little secret room with an outlet on the stars and cast a horoscope of

the thief. Something that they saw in the horoscope seemed to satisfy

the priests.



It was not like Thangobrind to go back by the road by which he had

come. No, he went by another road, even though it led to the narrow

way, night-house and spider-forest.



The city of Moung went towering by behind him, balcony above balcony,

eclipsing half the stars, as he trudged away with his diamond. Though

when a soft pittering as of velvet feet arose behind him he refused to

acknowledge that it might be what he feared, yet the instincts of his

trade told him that it is not well when any noise whatever follows a

diamond by night, and this was one of the largest that had ever come to

him in the way of business. When he came to the narrow way that leads to

spider-forest, Dead Man's Diamond feeling cold and heavy, and the

velvety footfall seeming fearfully close, the jeweller stopped and

almost hesitated. He looked behind him; there was nothing there. He

listened attentively; there was no sound now. Then he thought of the

screams of the Merchant Prince's daughter, whose soul was the diamond's

price, and smiled and went stoutly on. There watched him, apathetically,

over the narrow way, that grim and dubious woman whose house is the Night.

Thangobrind, hearing no longer the sound of suspicious feet, felt easier

now. He was all but come to the end of the narrow way, when the woman

listlessly uttered that ominous cough.



The cough was too full of meaning to be disregarded. Thangobrind turned

round and saw at once what he feared. The spider-idol had not stayed at

home. The jeweller put his diamond gently upon the ground and drew his

sword called Mouse. And then began that famous fight upon the narrow way

in which the grim old woman whose house was Night seemed to take so

little interest. To the spider-idol you saw at once it was all a

horrible joke. To the jeweller it was grim earnest. He fought and panted

and was pushed back slowly along the narrow way, but he wounded Hlo-hlo

all the while with terrible long gashes all over his deep, soft body

till Mouse was slimy with blood. But at last the persistent laughter of

Hlo-hlo was too much for the jeweller's nerves, and, once more wounding

his demoniac foe, he sank aghast and exhausted by the door of the house

called Night at the feet of the grim old woman, who having uttered once

that ominous cough interfered no further with the course of events. And

there carried Thangobrind the jeweller away those whose duty it was, to

the house where the two men hang, and taking down from his hook the

left-hand one of the two, they put that venturous jeweller in his place;

so that there fell on him the doom that he feared, as all men know

though it is so long since, and there abated somewhat the ire of the

envious gods.



And the only daughter of the Merchant Prince felt so little gratitude

for this great deliverance that she took to respectability of a

militant kind, and became aggressively dull, and called her home the

English Riviera, and had platitudes worked in worsted upon her

tea-cosy, and in the end never died, but passed away at her residence.







THE HOUSE OF THE SPHINX





When I came to the House of the Sphinx it was already dark. They made

me eagerly welcome. And I, in spite of the deed, was glad of any

shelter from that ominous wood. I saw at once that there had been a

deed, although a cloak did all that a cloak may do to conceal it. The

mere uneasiness of the welcome made me suspect that cloak.



The Sphinx was moody and silent. I had not come to pry into the

secrets of Eternity nor to investigate the Sphinx's private life, and

so had little to say and few questions to ask; but to whatever I did

say she remained morosely indifferent. It was clear that either she

suspected me of being in search of the secrets of one of her gods, or

of being boldly inquisitive about her traffic with Time, or else she

was darkly absorbed with brooding upon the deed.



I saw soon enough that there was another than me to welcome; I saw it

from the hurried way that they glanced from the door to the deed and

back to the door again. And it was clear that the welcome was to be a

bolted door. But such bolts, and such a door! Rust and decay and

fungus had been there far too long, and it was not a barrier any

longer that would keep out even a determined wolf. And it seemed to be

something worse than a wolf that they feared.



A little later on I gathered from what they said that some imperious

and ghastly thing was looking for the Sphinx, and that something that

had happened had made its arrival certain. It appeared that they had

slapped the Sphinx to vex her out of her apathy in order that she

should pray to one of her gods, whom she had littered in the house of

Time; but her moody silence was invincible, and her apathy Oriental,

ever since the deed had happened. And when they found that they could

not make her pray, there was nothing for them to do but to pay little

useless attentions to the rusty lock of the door, and to look at the

deed and wonder, and even pretend to hope, and to say that after all

it might not bring that destined thing from the forest, which no one

named.



It may be said I had chosen a gruesome house, but not if I had

described the forest from which I came, and I was in need of any spot

wherein I could rest my mind from the thought of it.



I wondered very much what thing would come from the forest on account

of the deed; and having seen that forest--as you, gentle reader, have

not--I had the advantage of knowing that anything might come. It was

useless to ask the Sphinx--she seldom reveals things, like her

paramour Time (the gods take after her), and while this mood was on

her, rebuff was certain. So I quietly began to oil the lock of the

door. And as soon as they saw this simple act I won their confidence.

It was not that my work was of any use--it should have been done long

before; but they saw that my interest was given for the moment to the

thing that they thought vital. They clustered round me then. They

asked me what I thought of the door, and whether I had seen better,

and whether I had seen worse; and I told them about all the doors I

knew, and said that the doors of the baptistry in Florence were better

doors, and the doors made by a certain firm of builders in London were

worse. And then I asked them what it was that was coming after the

Sphinx because of the deed. And at first they would not say, and I

stopped oiling the door; and then they said that it was the

arch-inquisitor of the forest, who is investigator and avenger of all

silverstrian things; and from all that they said about him it seemed to me

that this person was quite white, and was a kind of madness that would

settle down quite blankly upon a place, a kind of mist in which reason

could not live; and it was the fear of this that made them fumble

nervously at the lock of that rotten door; but with the Sphinx it was

not so much fear as sheer prophecy.



The hope that they tried to hope was well enough in its way, but I did

not share it; it was clear that the thing that they feared was the

corollary of the deed--one saw that more by the resignation upon the

face of the Sphinx than by their sorry anxiety for the door.



The wind soughed, and the great tapers flared, and their obvious fear

and the silence of the Sphinx grew more than ever a part of the

atmosphere, and bats went restlessly through the gloom of the wind

that beat the tapers low.



Then a few things screamed far off, then a little nearer, and

something was coming towards us, laughing hideously. I hastily gave a

prod to the door that they guarded; my finger sank right into the

mouldering wood--there was not a chance of holding it. I had not

leisure to observe their fright; I thought of the back-door, for the

forest was better than this; only the Sphinx was absolutely calm, her

prophecy was made and she seemed to have seen her doom, so that no new

thing could perturb her.



But by mouldering rungs of ladders as old as Man, by slippery edges of

the dreaded abyss, with an ominous dizziness about my heart and a

feeling of horror in the soles of my feet, I clambered from tower to

tower till I found the door that I sought; and it opened on to one of

the upper branches of a huge and sombre pine, down which I climbed on

to the floor of the forest. And I was glad to be back again in the

forest from which I had fled.



And the Sphinx in her menaced house--I know not how she fared--whether

she gazes for ever, disconsolate, at the deed, remembering only in her

smitten mind, at which the little boys now leer, that she once knew

well those things at which man stands aghast; or whether in the end

she crept away, and clambering horribly from abyss to abyss, came at

last to higher things, and is wise and eternal still. For who knows of

madness whether it is divine or whether it be of the pit?







PROBABLE ADVENTURE OF THE THREE LITERARY MEN





When the nomads came to El Lola they had no more songs, and the

question of stealing the golden box arose in all its magnitude. On the

one hand, many had sought the golden box, the receptacle (as the

Aethiopians know) of poems of fabulous value; and their doom is still

the common talk of Arabia. On the other hand, it was lonely to sit

around the camp-fire by night with no new songs.



It was the tribe of Heth that discussed these things one evening upon

the plains below the peak of Mluna. Their native land was the track

across the world of immemorial wanderers; and there was trouble among

the elders of the nomads because there were no new songs; while,

untouched by human trouble, untouched as yet by the night that was

hiding the plains away, the peak of Mluna, calm in the after-glow,

looked on the Dubious Land. And it was there on the plain upon the

known side of Mluna, just as the evening star came mouse-like into

view and the flames of the camp-fire lifted their lonely plumes

uncheered by any song, that that rash scheme was hastily planned by

the nomads which the world has named The Quest of the Golden Box.



No measure of wiser precaution could the elders of the nomads have

taken than to choose for their thief that very Slith, that identical

thief that (even as I write) in how many school-rooms governesses

teach stole a march on the King of Westalia. Yet the weight of the box

was such that others had to accompany him, and Sippy and Slorg were no

more agile thieves than may be found today among vendors of the

antique.



So over the shoulder of Mluna these three climbed next day and slept

as well as they might among its snows rather than risk a night in the

woods of the Dubious Land. And the morning came up radiant and the

birds were full of song, but the forest underneath and the waste

beyond it and the bare and ominous crags all wore the appearance of an

unuttered threat.



Though Slith had an experience of twenty years of theft, yet he said

little; only if one of the others made a stone roll with his foot, or,

later on in the forest, if one of them stepped on a twig, he whispered

sharply to them always the same words: "That is not business." He knew

that he could not make them better thieves during a two days' journey,

and whatever doubts he had he interfered no further.



From the shoulder of Mluna they dropped into the clouds, and from the

clouds to the forest, to whose native beasts, as well the three

thieves knew, all flesh was meat, whether it were the flesh of fish or

man. There the thieves drew idolatrously from their pockets each one a

separate god and prayed for protection in the unfortunate wood, and

hoped therefrom for a threefold chance of escape, since if anything

should eat one of them it were certain to eat them all, and they

confided that the corollary might be true and all should escape if one

did. Whether one of these gods was propitious and awake, or whether

all of the three, or whether it was chance that brought them through

the forest unmouthed by detestable beasts, none knoweth; but certainly

neither the emissaries of the god that most they feared, nor the wrath

of the topical god of that ominous place, brought their doom to the

three adventurers there or then. And so it was that they came to

Rumbly Heath, in the heart of the Dubious Land, whose stormy hillocks

were the ground-swell and the after-wash of the earthquake lulled for

a while. Something so huge that it seemed unfair to man that it should

move so softly stalked splendidly by them, and only so barely did they

escape its notice that one word rang and echoed through their three

imaginations--"If--if--if." And when this danger was at last gone by

they moved cautiously on again and presently saw the little harmless

mipt, half fairy and half gnome, giving shrill, contented squeaks on

the edge of the world. And they edged away unseen, for they said that

the inquisitiveness of the mipt had become fabulous, and that,

harmless as he was, he had a bad way with secrets; yet they probably

loathed the way that he nuzzles dead white bones, and would not admit

their loathing; for it does not become adventurers to care who eats

their bones. Be this as it may, they edged away from the mipt, and

came almost at once to the wizened tree, the goal-post of their

adventure, and knew that beside them was the crack in the world and

the bridge from Bad to Worse, and that underneath them stood the rocky

house of Owner of the Box.



This was their simple plan: to slip into the corridor in the upper

cliff; to run softly down it (of course with naked feet) under the

warning to travellers that is graven upon stone, which interpreters

take to be "It Is Better Not"; not to touch the berries that are there

for a purpose, on the right side going down; and so to come to the

guardian on his pedestal who had slept for a thousand years and should

be sleeping still; and go in through the open window. One man was to

wait outside by the crack in the World until the others came out with

the golden box, and, should they cry for help, he was to threaten at

once to unfasten the iron clamp that kept the crack together. When the

box was secured they were to travel all night and all the following

day, until the cloud-banks that wrapped the slopes of Mluna were well

between them and Owner of the Box.



The door in the cliff was open. They passed without a murmur down the

cold steps, Slith leading them all the way. A glance of longing, no

more, each gave to the beautiful berries. The guardian upon his

pedestal was still asleep. Slorg climbed by a ladder, that Slith knew

where to find, to the iron clamp across the crack in the World, and

waited beside it with a chisel in his hand, listening closely for

anything untoward, while his friends slipped into the house; and no

sound came. And presently Slith and Sippy found the golden box:

everything seemed happening as they had planned, it only remained to

see if it was the right one and to escape with it from that dreadful

place. Under the shelter of the pedestal, so near to the guardian that

they could feel his warmth, which paradoxically had the effect of

chilling the blood of the boldest of them, they smashed the emerald

hasp and opened the golden box; and there they read by the light of

ingenious sparks which Slith knew how to contrive, and even this poor

light they hid with their bodies. What was their joy, even at that

perilous moment, as they lurked between the guardian and the abyss, to

find that the box contained fifteen peerless odes in the alcaic form,

five sonnets that were by far the most beautiful in the world, nine

ballads in the manner of Provence that had no equal in the treasuries

of man, a poem addressed to a moth in twenty-eight perfect stanzas, a

piece of blank verse of over a hundred lines on a level not yet known

to have been attained by man, as well as fifteen lyrics on which no

merchant would dare to set a price. They would have read them again,

for they gave happy tears to a man and memories of dear things done in

infancy, and brought sweet voices from far sepulchres; but Slith

pointed imperiously to the way by which they had come, and

extinguished the light; and Slorg and Sippy sighed, then took the box.



The guardian still slept the sleep that survived a thousand years.



As they came away they saw that indulgent chair close by the edge of

the World in which Owner of the Box had lately sat reading

selfishly and alone the most beautiful songs and verses that poet ever

dreamed.



They came in silence to the foot of the stairs; and then it befell

that as they drew near safely, in the night's most secret hour, some

hand in an upper chamber lit a shocking light, lit it and made no

sound.



For a moment it might have been an ordinary light, fatal as even that

could very well be at such a moment as this; but when it began to

follow them like an eye and to grow redder and redder as it watched

them, then even optimism despaired.



And Sippy very unwisely attempted flight, and Slorg even as unwisely

tried to hide; but Slith, knowing well why that light was lit in that

secret upper chamber and _who_ it was that lit it, leaped over the edge

of the World and is falling from us still through the unreverberate

blackness of the abyss.







THE INJUDICIOUS PRAYERS OF POMBO THE IDOLATER





Pombo the idolater had prayed to Ammuz a simple prayer, a necessary

prayer, such as even an idol of ivory could very easily grant, and

Ammuz had not immediately granted it. Pombo had therefore prayed to

Tharma for the overthrow of Ammuz, an idol friendly to Tharma, and in

doing this offended against the etiquette of the gods. Tharma refused

to grant the little prayer. Pombo prayed frantically to all the gods

of idolatry, for though it was a simple matter, yet it was very

necessary to a man. And gods that were older than Ammuz rejected the

prayers of Pombo, and even gods that were younger and therefore of

greater repute. He prayed to them one by one, and they all refused to

hear him; nor at first did he think at all of that subtle, divine

etiquette against which he had offended. It occurred to him all at

once as he prayed to his fiftieth idol, a little green-jade god whom

the Chinese know, that all the idols were in league against him. When

Pombo discovered this he resented his birth bitterly, and made

lamentation and alleged that he was lost. He might have been seen then

in any part of London haunting curiosity-shops and places where they

sold idols of ivory or of stone, for he dwelt in London with others of

his race though he was born in Burmah among those who hold Ganges

holy. On drizzly evenings of November's worst his haggard face could

be seen in the glow of some shop pressed close against the glass,

where he would supplicate some calm, cross-legged idol till policemen

moved him on. And after closing hours back he would go to his dingy

room, in that part of our capital where English is seldom spoken, to

supplicate little idols of his own. And when Pombo's simple, necessary

prayer was equally refused by the idols of museums, auction-rooms,

shops, then he took counsel with himself and purchased incense and

burned it in a brazier before his own cheap little idols, and played

the while upon an instrument such as that wherewith men charm snakes.

And still the idols clung to their etiquette.



Whether Pombo knew about this etiquette and considered it frivolous in

the face of his need, or whether his need, now grown desperate,

unhinged his mind, I know not, but Pombo the idolater took a stick and

suddenly turned iconoclast.



Pombo the iconoclast immediately left his house, leaving his idols to

be swept away with the dust and so to mingle with Man, and went to an

arch-idolater of repute who carved idols out of rare stones, and put

his case before him. The arch-idolater who made idols of his own

rebuked Pombo in the name of Man for having broken his idols--"for

hath not Man made them?" the arch-idolater said; and concerning the

idols themselves he spoke long and learnedly, explaining divine

etiquette, and how Pombo had offended, and how no idol in the world

would listen to Pombo's prayer. When Pombo heard this he wept and made

bitter outcry, and cursed the gods of ivory and the gods of jade, and

the hand of Man that made them, but most of all he cursed their

etiquette that had undone, as he said, an innocent man; so that at

last that arch-idolater, who made idols of his own, stopped in his

work upon an idol of jasper for a king that was weary of Wosh, and

took compassion on Pombo, and told him that though no idol in the

world would listen to his prayer, yet only a little way over the edge

of it a certain disreputable idol sat who knew nothing of etiquette,

and granted prayers that no respectable god would ever consent to

hear. When Pombo heard this he took two handfuls of the

arch-idolater's beard and kissed them joyfully, and dried his tears

and became his old impertinent self again. And he that carved from

jasper the usurper of Wosh explained how in the village of World's

End, at the furthest end of Last Street, there is a hole that you take

to be a well, close by the garden wall, but that if you lower yourself

by your hands over the edge of the hole, and feel about with your feet

till they find a ledge, that is the top step of a flight of stairs

that takes you down over the edge of the World. "For all that men

know, those stairs may have a purpose and even a bottom step," said

the arch-idolater, "but discussion about the lower flights is idle."

Then the teeth of Pombo chattered, for he feared the darkness, but he

that made idols of his own explained that those stairs were always lit

by the faint blue gloaming in which the World spins. "Then," he said,

"you will go by Lonely House and under the bridge that leads from the

House to Nowhere, and whose purpose is not guessed; thence past

Maharrion, the god of flowers, and his high-priest, who is neither

bird nor cat; and so you will come to the little idol Duth, the

disreputable god that will grant your prayer." And he went on carving

again at his idol of jasper for the king who was weary of Wosh; and

Pombo thanked him and went singing away, for in his vernacular mind he

thought that "he _had_ the gods."



It is a long journey from London to World's End, and Pombo had no

money left, yet within five weeks he was strolling along Last

Street; but how he contrived to get there I will not say, for it was

not entirely honest. And Pombo found the well at the end of the garden

beyond the end house of Last Street, and many thoughts ran through his

mind as he hung by his hands from the edge, but chiefest of all those

thoughts was one that said the gods were laughing at him through the

mouth of the arch-idolater, their prophet, and the thought beat in his

head till it ached like his wrists ... and then he found the step.



And Pombo walked downstairs. There, sure enough, was the gloaming in

which the world spins, and stars shone far off in it faintly;

there was nothing before him as he went downstairs but that strange

blue waste of gloaming, with its multitudes of stars, and comets

plunging through it on outward journeys and comets returning home. And

then he saw the lights of the bridge to Nowhere, and all of a sudden

he was in the glare of the shimmering parlour-window of Lonely House;

and he heard voices there pronouncing words, and the voices were

nowise human, and but for his bitter need he had screamed and fled.

Halfway between the voices and Maharrion, whom he now saw standing out

from the world, covered in rainbow halos, he perceived the weird grey

beast that is neither cat nor bird. As Pombo hesitated, chilly with

fear, he heard those voices grow louder in Lonely House, and at that

he stealthily moved a few steps lower, and then rushed past the beast.

The beast intently watched Maharrion hurling up bubbles that are every

one a season of spring in unknown constellations, calling the swallows

home to unimagined fields, watched him without even turning to look at

Pombo, and saw him drop into the Linlunlarna, the river that rises at

the edge of the World, the golden pollen that sweetens the tide of the

river and is carried away from the World to be a joy to the Stars. And

there before Pombo was the little disreputable god who cares nothing

for etiquette and will answer prayers that are refused by all the

respectable idols. And whether the view of him, at last, excited

Pombo's eagerness, or whether his need was greater than he could bear

that it drove him so swiftly downstairs, or whether, as is most likely,

he ran too fast past the beast, I do not know, and it does not matter

to Pombo; but at any rate he could not stop, as he had designed, in

attitude of prayer at the feet of Duth, but ran on past him down the

narrowing steps, clutching at smooth, bare rocks till he fell from the

World as, when our hearts miss a beat, we fall in dreams and wake up

with a dreadful jolt; but there was no waking up for Pombo, who still

fell on towards the incurious stars, and his fate is even one with the

fate of Slith.







THE LOOT OF BOMBASHARNA





Things had grown too hot for Shard, captain of pirates, on all the

seas that he knew. The ports of Spain were closed to him; they knew

him in San Domingo; men winked in Syracuse when he went by; the two

Kings of the Sicilies never smiled within an hour of speaking of him;

there were huge rewards for his head in every capital city, with

pictures of it for identification--_and all the pictures were

unflattering_. Therefore Captain Shard decided that the time had come

to tell his men the secret.



Riding off Teneriffe one night, he called them all together. He

generously admitted that there were things in the past that might

require explanation: the crowns that the Princes of Aragon had sent to

their nephews the Kings of the two Americas had certainly never

reached their Most Sacred Majesties. Where, men might ask, were the

eyes of Captain Stobbud? Who had been burning towns on the Patagonian

seaboard? Why should such a ship as theirs choose pearls for cargo?

Why so much blood on the decks and so many guns? And where was the

_Nancy_, the _Lark_, or the _Margaret Belle_? Such questions as these,

he urged, might be asked by the inquisitive, and if counsel for the

defence should happen to be a fool, and unacquainted with the ways of

the sea, they might become involved in troublesome legal formulae. And

Bloody Bill, as they rudely called Mr. Gagg, a member of the crew,

looked up at the sky, and said that it was a windy night and looked

like hanging. And some of those present thoughtfully stroked their

necks while Captain Shard unfolded to them his plan. He said the time

was come to quit the _Desperate Lark_, for she was too well known to

the navies of four kingdoms, and a fifth was getting to know her, and

others had suspicions. (More cutters than even Captain Shard suspected

were already looking for her jolly black flag with its neat

skull-and-crossbones in yellow.) There was a little archipelago that

he knew of on the wrong side of the Sargasso Sea; there were about

thirty islands there, bare, ordinary islands, but one of them floated.

He had noticed it years ago, and had gone ashore and never told a

soul, but had quietly anchored it with the anchor of his ship to the

bottom of the sea, which just there was profoundly deep, and had made

the thing the secret of his life, determining to marry and settle down

there if it ever became impossible to earn his livelihood in the usual

way at sea. When first he saw it, it was drifting slowly, with the

wind in the tops of the trees; but if the cable had not rusted away,

it should be still where he left it, and they would make a rudder and

hollow out cabins below, and at night they would hoist sails to the

trunks of the trees and sail wherever they liked.



And all the pirates cheered, for they wanted to set their feet on land

again somewhere where the hangman would not come and jerk them off it

at once; and bold men though they were, it was a strain seeing so many

lights coming their way at night. Even then...! But it swerved away

again and was lost in the mist.



And Captain Shard said that they would need to get provisions first,

and he, for one, intended to marry before he settled down; and so they

should have one more fight before they left the ship, and sack the

sea-coast city of Bombasharna and take from it provisions for several

years, while he himself would marry the Queen of the South. And again

the pirates cheered, for often they had seen seacoast Bombasharna, and

had always envied its opulence from the sea.



So they set all sail, and often altered their course, and dodged and

fled from strange lights till dawn appeared, and all day long fled

southwards. And by evening they saw the silver spires of slender

Bombasharna, a city that was the glory of the coast. And in the midst

of it, far away though they were, they saw the palace of the Queen of

the South; and it was so full of windows all looking toward the sea,

and they were so full of light, both from the sunset that was fading

upon the water and from candles that maids were lighting one by one,

that it looked far off like a pearl, shimmering still in its haliotis

shell, still wet from the sea.



So Captain Shard and his pirates saw it, at evening over the water,

and thought of rumours that said that Bombasharna was the loveliest

city of the coasts of the world, and that its palace was lovelier even

than Bombasharna; but for the Queen of the South rumour had no

comparison. Then night came down and hid the silver spires, and Shard

slipped on through the gathering darkness until by midnight the

piratic ship lay under the seaward battlements.



And at the hour when sick men mostly die, and sentries on lonely

ramparts stand to arms, exactly half-an-hour before dawn, Shard, with

two rowing boats and half his crew, with craftily muffled oars, landed

below the battlements. They were through the gateway of the palace

itself before the alarm was sounded, and as soon as they heard the

alarm Shard's gunners at sea opened upon the town, and before the

sleepy soldiery of Bombasharna knew whether the danger was from the

land or the sea, Shard had successfully captured the Queen of the

South. They would have looted all day that silver sea-coast city, but

there appeared with dawn suspicious topsails just along the horizon.

Therefore the captain with his Queen went down to the shore at once

and hastily re-embarked and sailed away with what loot they had

hurriedly got, and with fewer men, for they had to fight a good deal to

get back to the boat. They cursed all day the interference of those

ominous ships which steadily grew nearer. There were six ships at

first, and that night they slipped away from all but two; but all the

next day those two were still in sight, and each of them had more guns

than the _Desperate Lark_. All the next night Shard dodged about the

sea, but the two ships separated and one kept him in sight, and the

next morning it was alone with Shard on the sea, and his archipelago

was just in sight, the secret of his life.



And Shard saw he must fight, and a bad fight it was, and yet it suited

Shard's purpose, for he had more merry men when the fight began than

he needed for his island. And they got it over before any other ship

came up; and Shard put all adverse evidence out of the way, and came

that night to the islands near the Sargasso Sea.



Long before it was light the survivors of the crew were peering at the

sea, and when dawn came there was the island, no bigger than two

ships, straining hard at its anchor, with the wind in the tops of the

trees.



And then they landed and dug cabins below and raised the anchor out of

the deep sea, and soon they made the island what they called

shipshape. But the _Desperate Lark_ they sent away empty under full

sail to sea, where more nations than Shard suspected were watching for

her, and where she was presently captured by an admiral of Spain, who,

when he found none of that famous crew on board to hang by the neck

from the yard-arm, grew ill through disappointment.



And Shard on his island offered the Queen of the South the choicest of

the old wines of Provence, and for adornment gave her Indian jewels

looted from galleons with treasure for Madrid, and spread a table

where she dined in the sun, while in some cabin below he bade the

least coarse of his mariners sing; yet always she was morose and moody

towards him, and often at evening he was heard to say that he wished

he knew more about the ways of Queens. So they lived for years, the

pirates mostly gambling and drinking below, Captain Shard trying to

please the Queen of the South, and she never wholly forgetting

Bombasharna. When they needed new provisions they hoisted sails on the

trees, and as long as no ship came in sight they scudded before the

wind, with the water rippling over the beach of the island; but as

soon as they sighted a ship the sails came down, and they became an

ordinary uncharted rock.



They mostly moved by night; sometimes they hovered off sea-coast towns

as of old, sometimes they boldly entered river-mouths, and even

attached themselves for a while to the mainland, whence they would

plunder the neighbourhood and escape again to sea. And if a ship was

wrecked on their island of a night they said it was all to the good.

They grew very crafty in seamanship, and cunning in what they did, for

they knew that any news of the _Desperate Lark_'s old crew would bring

hangmen from the interior running down to every port.



And no one is known to have found them out or to have annexed their

island; but a rumour arose and passed from port to port and every

place where sailors meet together, and even survives to this day, of a

dangerous uncharted rock anywhere between Plymouth and the Horn, which

would suddenly rise in the safest track of ships, and upon which

vessels were supposed to have been wrecked, leaving, strangely enough,

no evidence of their doom. There was a little speculation about it at

first, till it was silenced by the chance remark of a man old with

wandering: "It is one of the mysteries that haunt the sea."



And almost Captain Shard and the Queen of the South lived happily ever

after, though still at evening those on watch in the trees would see

their captain sit with a puzzled air or hear him muttering now and again

in a discontented way: "I wish I knew more about the ways of Queens."







MISS CUBBIDGE AND THE DRAGON OF ROMANCE





This tale is told in the balconies of Belgrave Square and among the

towers of Pont Street; men sing it at evening in the Brompton Road.



Little upon her eighteenth birthday thought Miss Cubbidge, of Number

12A Prince of Wales' Square, that before another year had gone its way

she would lose the sight of that unshapely oblong that was so long her

home. And, had you told her further that within that year all trace of

that so-called square, and of the day when her father was elected by a

thumping majority to share in the guidance of the destinies of the

empire, should utterly fade from her memory, she would merely have

said in that affected voice of hers, "Go to!"



There was nothing about it in the daily Press, the policy of her

father's party had no provision for it, there was no hint of it in

conversation at evening parties to which Miss Cubbidge went: there was

nothing to warn her at all that a loathsome dragon with golden scales

that rattled as he went should have come up clean out of the prime of

romance and gone by night (so far as we know) through Hammersmith, and

come to Ardle Mansions, and then had turned to his left, which of

course brought him to Miss Cubbidge's father's house.



There sat Miss Cubbidge at evening on her balcony quite alone, waiting

for her father to be made a baronet. She was wearing walking-boots and

a hat and a low-necked evening dress; for a painter was but just now

painting her portrait and neither she nor the painter saw anything odd

in the strange combination. She did not notice the roar of the

dragon's golden scales, nor distinguish above the manifold lights of

London the small, red glare of his eyes. He suddenly lifted his head,

a blaze of gold, over the balcony; he did not appear a yellow dragon

then, for his glistening scales reflected the beauty that London puts

upon her only at evening and night. She screamed, but to no knight,

nor knew what knight to call on, nor guessed where were the dragons'

overthrowers of far, romantic days, nor what mightier game they

chased, or what wars they waged; perchance they were busy even then

arming for Armageddon.



Out of the balcony of her father's house in Prince of Wales' Square,

the painted dark-green balcony that grew blacker every year, the

dragon lifted Miss Cubbidge and spread his rattling wings, and London

fell away like an old fashion. And England fell away, and the smoke of

its factories, and the round material world that goes humming round

the sun vexed and pursued by time, until there appeared the eternal

and ancient lands of Romance lying low by mystical seas.



You had not pictured Miss Cubbidge stroking the golden head of one of

the dragons of song with one hand idly, while with the other she

sometimes played with pearls brought up from lonely places of the sea.

They filled huge haliotis shells with pearls and laid them there

beside her, they brought her emeralds which she set to flash among the

tresses of her long black hair, they brought her threaded sapphires

for her cloak: all this the princes of fable did and the elves and the

gnomes of myth. And partly she still lived, and partly she was one

with long-ago and with those sacred tales that nurses tell, when all

their children are good, and evening has come, and the fire is burning

well, and the soft pat-pat of the snowflakes on the pane is like the

furtive tread of fearful things in old, enchanted woods. If at first

she missed those dainty novelties among which she was reared, the old,

sufficient song of the mystical sea singing of faery lore at first

soothed and at last consoled her. Even, she forgot those

advertisements of pills that are so dear to England; even, she forgot

political cant and the things that one discusses and the things that

one does not, and had perforce to content herself with seeing sailing

by huge golden-laden galleons with treasure for Madrid, and the merry

skull-and-cross-bones of the pirateers, and the tiny nautilus setting

out to sea, and ships of heroes trafficking in romance or of princes

seeking for enchanted isles.



It was not by chains that the dragon kept her there, but by one of the

spells of old. To one to whom the facilities of the daily Press had

for so long been accorded spells would have palled--you would have

said--and galleons after a time and all things out-of-date. After a

time. But whether the centuries passed her or whether the years or

whether no time at all, she did not know. If anything indicated the

passing of time it was the rhythm of elfin horns blowing upon the

heights. If the centuries went by her the spell that bound her gave

her also perennial youth, and kept alight for ever the lantern by her

side, and saved from decay the marble palace facing the mystical sea.

And if no time went by her there at all, her single moment on those

marvellous coasts was turned as it were to a crystal reflecting a

thousand scenes. If it was all a dream, it was a dream that knew no

morning and no fading away. The tide roamed on and whispered of mastery

and of myth, while near that captive lady, asleep in his marble tank

the golden dragon dreamed: and a little way out from the coast all

that the dragon dreamed showed faintly in the mist that lay over the

sea. He never dreamed of any rescuing knight. So long as he dreamed,

it was twilight; but when he came up nimbly out of his tank night fell

and starlight glistened on the dripping, golden scales.



There he and his captive either defeated Time or never encountered him

at all; while, in the world we know, raged Roncesvalles or battles yet

to be--I know not to what part of the shore of Romance he bore her.

Perhaps she became one of those princesses of whom fable loves to

tell, but let it suffice that there she lived by the sea: and kings

ruled, and Demons ruled, and kings came again, and many cities

returned to their native dust, and still she abided there, and still

her marble palace passed not away nor the power that there was in the

dragon's spell.



And only once did there ever come to her a message from the world that

of old she knew. It came in a pearly ship across the mystical sea; it

was from an old school-friend that she had had in Putney, merely a

note, no more, in a little, neat, round hand: it said, "It is not

Proper for you to be there alone."







THE QUEST OF THE QUEEN'S TEARS





Sylvia, Queen of the Woods, in her woodland palace, held court, and

made a mockery of her suitors. She would sing to them, she said, she

would give them banquets, she would tell them tales of legendary days,

her jugglers should caper before them, her armies salute them, her

fools crack jests with them and make whimsical quips, only she could

not love them.



This was not the way, they said, to treat princes in their splendour

and mysterious troubadours concealing kingly names; it was not in

accordance with fable; myth had no precedent for it. She should have

thrown her glove, they said, into some lion's den, she should have

asked for a score of venomous heads of the serpents of Licantara, or

demanded the death of any notable dragon, or sent them all upon some

deadly quest, but that she could not love them--! It was unheard

of--it had no parallel in the annals of romance.



And then she said that if they must needs have a quest she would offer

her hand to him who first should move her to tears: and the quest

should be called, for reference in histories or song, the Quest of the

Queen's Tears, and he that achieved them she would wed, be he only a

petty duke of lands unknown to romance.



And many were moved to anger, for they hoped for some bloody quest;

but the old lords chamberlain said, as they muttered among themselves

in a far, dark end of the chamber, that the quest was hard and wise,

for that if she could ever weep she might also love. They had known

her all her childhood; she had never sighed. Many men had she seen,

suitors and courtiers, and had never turned her head after one went

by. Her beauty was as still sunsets of bitter evenings when all the

world is frore, a wonder and a chill. She was as a sun-stricken

mountain uplifted alone, all beautiful with ice, a desolate and lonely

radiance late at evening far up beyond the comfortable world, not

quite to be companioned by the stars, the doom of the mountaineer.



If she could weep, they said, she could love, they said.



And she smiled pleasantly on those ardent princes, and troubadours

concealing kingly names.



Then one by one they told, each suitor prince the story of his love,

with outstretched hands and kneeling on the knee; and very sorry and

pitiful were the tales, so that often up in the galleries some maid of

the palace wept. And very graciously she nodded her head like a

listless magnolia in the deeps of the night moving idly to all the

breezes its glorious bloom.



And when the princes had told their desperate loves and had departed

away with no other spoil than of their own tears only, even then there

came the unknown troubadours and told their tales in song, concealing

their gracious names.



And there was one, Ackronnion, clothed with rags, on which was the

dust of roads, and underneath the rags was war-scarred armour whereon

were the dints of blows; and when he stroked his harp and sang his song,

in the gallery above maidens wept, and even old lords chamberlain

whimpered among themselves and thereafter laughed through their tears

and said: "It is easy to make old people weep and to bring idle tears

from lazy girls; but he will not set a-weeping the Queen of the

Woods."



And graciously she nodded, and he was the last. And disconsolate went

away those dukes and princes, and troubadours in disguise. Yet

Ackronnion pondered as he went away.



King he was of Afarmah, Lool and Haf, over-lord of Zeroora and hilly

Chang, and duke of the dukedoms of Molong and Mlash, none of them

unfamiliar with romance or unknown or overlooked in the making of

myth. He pondered as he went in his thin disguise.



Now by those that do not remember their childhood, having other things

to do, be it understood that underneath fairyland, which is, as all

men know, at the edge of the world, there dwelleth the Gladsome Beast.

A synonym he for joy.



It is known how the lark in its zenith, children at play out-of-doors,

good witches and jolly old parents have all been compared--how

aptly!--with this very same Gladsome Beast. Only one "crab" he has (if

I may use slang for a moment to make myself perfectly clear), only one

drawback, and that is that in the gladness of his heart he spoils the

cabbages of the Old Man Who Looks After Fairyland,--and of course he

eats men.



It must further be understood that whoever may obtain the tears of the

Gladsome Beast in a bowl, and become drunken upon them, may move all

persons to shed tears of joy so long as he remains inspired by the

potion to sing or to make music.



Now Ackronnion pondered in this wise: that if he could obtain the

tears of the Gladsome Beast by means of his art, withholding him from

violence by the spell of music, and if a friend should slay the

Gladsome Beast before his weeping ceased--for an end must come to

weeping even with men--that so he might get safe away with the tears,

and drink them before the Queen of the Woods and move her to tears of

joy. He sought out therefore a humble knightly man who cared not for

the beauty of Sylvia, Queen of the Woods, but had found a woodland

maiden of his own once long ago in summer. And the man's name was

Arrath, a subject of Ackronnion, a knight-at-arms of the spear-guard:

and together they set out through the fields of fable until they came

to Fairyland, a kingdom sunning itself (as all men know) for leagues

along the edges of the world. And by a strange old pathway they came

to the land they sought, through a wind blowing up the pathway sheer

from space with a kind of metallic taste from the roving stars. Even

so they came to the windy house of thatch where dwells the Old Man Who

Looks After Fairyland sitting by parlour windows that look away from

the world. He made them welcome in his star-ward parlour, telling them

tales of Space, and when they named to him their perilous quest he

said it would be a charity to kill the Gladsome Beast; for he was

clearly one of those that liked not its happy ways. And then he took

them out through his back door, for the front door had no pathway nor

even a step--from it the old man used to empty his slops sheer on to

the Southern Cross--and so they came to the garden wherein his

cabbages were, and those flowers that only blow in Fairyland, turning

their faces always towards the comet, and he pointed them out the way

to the place he called Underneath, where the Gladsome Beast had his

lair. Then they manoeuvred. Ackronnion was to go by the way of the

steps with his harp and an agate bowl, while Arrath went round by a

crag on the other side. Then the Old Man Who Looks After Fairyland

went back to his windy house, muttering angrily as he passed his

cabbages, for he did not love the ways of the Gladsome Beast; and the

two friends parted on their separate ways.



Nothing perceived them but that ominous crow glutted overlong already

upon the flesh of man.



The wind blew bleak from the stars.



At first there was dangerous climbing, and then Ackronnion gained the

smooth, broad steps that led from the edge to the lair, and at that

moment heard at the top of the steps the continuous chuckles of the

Gladsome Beast.



He feared then that its mirth might be insuperable, not to be saddened

by the most grievous song; nevertheless he did not turn back then, but

softly climbed the stairs and, placing the agate bowl upon a step,

struck up the chaunt called Dolorous. It told of desolate, regretted

things befallen happy cities long since in the prime of the world. It

told of how the gods and beasts and men had long ago loved beautiful

companions, and long ago in vain. It told of the golden host of happy

hopes, but not of their achieving. It told how Love scorned Death, but

told of Death's laughter. The contented chuckles of the Gladsome Beast

suddenly ceased in his lair. He rose and shook himself. He was still

unhappy. Ackronnion still sang on the chaunt called Dolorous. The

Gladsome Beast came mournfully up to him. Ackronnion ceased not for

the sake of his panic, but still sang on. He sang of the malignity of

time. Two tears welled large in the eyes of the Gladsome Beast.

Ackronnion moved the agate bowl to a suitable spot with his foot. He

sang of autumn and of passing away. Then the beast wept as the frore

hills weep in the thaw, and the tears splashed big into the agate

bowl. Ackronnion desperately chaunted on; he told of the glad

unnoticed things men see and do not see again, of sunlight beheld

unheeded on faces now withered away. The bowl was full. Ackronnion was

desperate: the Beast was so close. Once he thought that its mouth was

watering!--but it was only the tears that had run on the lips of the

Beast. He felt as a morsel! The Beast was ceasing to weep! He sang of

worlds that had disappointed the gods. And all of a sudden, crash! and

the staunch spear of Arrath went home behind the shoulder, and the

tears and the joyful ways of the Gladsome Beast were ended and over

for ever.



And carefully they carried the bowl of tears away, leaving the body of

the Gladsome Beast as a change of diet for the ominous crow; and going

by the windy house of thatch they said farewell to the Old Man Who

Looks After Fairyland, who when he heard of the deed rubbed his hands

together and mumbled again and again, "And a very good thing, too. My

cabbages! My cabbages!"



And not long after Ackronnion sang again in the sylvan palace of the

Queen of the Woods, having first drunk all the tears in his agate

bowl. And it was a gala night, and all the court were there and

ambassadors from the lands of legend and myth, and even some from

Terra Cognita.



And Ackronnion sang as he never sang before, and will not sing again.

O, but dolorous, dolorous, are all the ways of man, few and fierce are

his days, and the end trouble, and vain, vain his endeavour: and

woman--who shall tell of it?--her doom is written with man's by

listless, careless gods with their faces to other spheres.



Somewhat thus he began, and then inspiration seized him, and all the

trouble in the beauty of his song may not be set down by me: there was

much of gladness in it, and all mingled with grief: it was like the

way of man: it was like our destiny.



Sobs arose at his song, sighs came back along echoes: seneschals,

soldiers, sobbed, and a clear cry made the maidens; like rain the

tears came down from gallery to gallery.



All round the Queen of the Woods was a storm of sobbing and sorrow.



But no, she would not weep.







THE HOARD OF THE GIBBELINS





The Gibbelins eat, as is well known, nothing less good than man. Their

evil tower is joined to Terra Cognita, to the lands we know, by a

bridge. Their hoard is beyond reason; avarice has no use for it; they

have a separate cellar for emeralds and a separate cellar for

sapphires; they have filled a hole with gold and dig it up when they

need it. And the only use that is known for their ridiculous wealth is

to attract to their larder a continual supply of food. In times of

famine they have even been known to scatter rubies abroad, a little

trail of them to some city of Man, and sure enough their larders would

soon be full again.



Their tower stands on the other side of that river known to Homer--_ho

rhoos okeanoio_, as he called it--which surrounds the world. And where

the river is narrow and fordable the tower was built by the Gibbelins'

gluttonous sires, for they liked to see burglars rowing easily to

their steps. Some nourishment that common soil has not the huge trees

drained there with their colossal roots from both banks of the river.



There the Gibbelins lived and discreditably fed.



Alderic, Knight of the Order of the City and the Assault, hereditary

Guardian of the King's Peace of Mind, a man not unremembered among

makers of myth, pondered so long upon the Gibbelins' hoard that by now

he deemed it his. Alas that I should say of so perilous a venture,

undertaken at dead of night by a valorous man, that its motive was

sheer avarice! Yet upon avarice only the Gibbelins relied to keep their

larders full, and once in every hundred years sent spies into the cities

of men to see how avarice did, and always the spies returned again to

the tower saying that all was well.



It may be thought that, as the years went on and men came by fearful

ends on that tower's wall, fewer and fewer would come to the

Gibbelins' table: but the Gibbelins found otherwise.



Not in the folly and frivolity of his youth did Alderic come to the

tower, but he studied carefully for several years the manner in which

burglars met their doom when they went in search of the treasure that

he considered his. _In every case they had entered by the door_.



He consulted those who gave advice on this quest; he noted every

detail and cheerfully paid their fees, and determined to do nothing

that they advised, for what were their clients now? No more than

examples of the savoury art, and mere half-forgotten memories of a

meal; and many, perhaps, no longer even that.



These were the requisites for the quest that these men used to advise:

a horse, a boat, mail armour, and at least three men-at-arms. Some

said, "Blow the horn at the tower door"; others said, "Do not touch

it."



Alderic thus decided: he would take no horse down to the river's edge,

he would not row along it in a boat, and he would go alone and by way

of the Forest Unpassable.



How pass, you may say, the unpassable? This was his plan: there was a

dragon he knew of who if peasants' prayers are heeded deserved to die,

not alone because of the number of maidens he cruelly slew, but

because he was bad for the crops; he ravaged the very land and was the

bane of a dukedom.



Now Alderic determined to go up against him. So he took horse and

spear and pricked till he met the dragon, and the dragon came out

against him breathing bitter smoke. And to him Alderic shouted, "Hath

foul dragon ever slain true knight?" And well the dragon knew that

this had never been, and he hung his head and was silent, for he was

glutted with blood. "Then," said the knight, "if thou would'st ever

taste maiden's blood again thou shalt be my trusty steed, and if not,

by this spear there shall befall thee all that the troubadours tell of

the dooms of thy breed."



And the dragon did not open his ravening mouth, nor rush upon the

knight, breathing out fire; for well he knew the fate of those that

did these things, but he consented to the terms imposed, and swore to

the knight to become his trusty steed.



It was on a saddle upon this dragon's back that Alderic afterwards

sailed above the unpassable forest, even above the tops of those

measureless trees, children of wonder. But first he pondered that

subtle plan of his which was more profound than merely to avoid all

that had been done before; and he commanded a blacksmith, and the

blacksmith made him a pickaxe.



Now there was great rejoicing at the rumour of Alderic's quest, for

all folk knew that he was a cautious man, and they deemed that he

would succeed and enrich the world, and they rubbed their hands in the

cities at the thought of largesse; and there was joy among all men in

Alderic's country, except perchance among the lenders of money, who

feared they would soon be paid. And there was rejoicing also because

men hoped that when the Gibbelins were robbed of their hoard, they

would shatter their high-built bridge and break the golden chains that

bound them to the world, and drift back, they and their tower, to the

moon, from which they had come and to which they rightly belonged.

There was little love for the Gibbelins, though all men envied their

hoard.



So they all cheered, that day when he mounted his dragon, as though he

was already a conqueror, and what pleased them more than the good that

they hoped he would do to the world was that he scattered gold as he

rode away; for he would not need it, he said, if he found the

Gibbelins' hoard, and he would not need it more if he smoked on the

Gibbelins' table.



When they heard that he had rejected the advice of those that gave it,

some said that the knight was mad, and others said he was greater than

those what gave the advice, but none appreciated the worth of his

plan.



He reasoned thus: for centuries men had been well advised and had gone

by the cleverest way, while the Gibbelins came to expect them to come

by boat and to look for them at the door whenever their larder was

empty, even as a man looketh for a snipe in a marsh; but how, said

Alderic, if a snipe should sit in the top of a tree, and would men

find him there? Assuredly never! So Alderic decided to swim the river

and not to go by the door, but to pick his way into the tower through

the stone. Moreover, it was in his mind to work below the level of the

ocean, the river (as Homer knew) that girdles the world, so that as

soon as he made a hole in the wall the water should pour in,

confounding the Gibbelins, and flooding the cellars, rumoured to be

twenty feet in depth, and therein he would dive for emeralds as a

diver dives for pearls.



And on the day that I tell of he galloped away from his home

scattering largesse of gold, as I have said, and passed through many

kingdoms, the dragon snapping at maidens as he went, but being unable

to eat them because of the bit in his mouth, and earning no gentler

reward than a spurthrust where he was softest. And so they came to the

swart arboreal precipice of the unpassable forest. The dragon rose at

it with a rattle of wings. Many a farmer near the edge of the world

saw him up there where yet the twilight lingered, a faint, black,

wavering line; and mistaking him for a row of geese going inland from

the ocean, went into their houses cheerily rubbing their hands and

saying that winter was coming, and that we should soon have snow. Soon

even there the twilight faded away, and when they descended at the

edge of the world it was night and the moon was shining. Ocean, the

ancient river, narrow and shallow there, flowed by and made no murmur.

Whether the Gibbelins banqueted or whether they watched by the door,

they also made no murmur. And Alderic dismounted and took his armour

off, and saying one prayer to his lady, swam with his pickaxe. He did

not part from his sword, for fear that he meet with a Gibbelin. Landed

the other side, he began to work at once, and all went well with him.

Nothing put out its head from any window, and all were lighted so that

nothing within could see him in the dark. The blows of his pickaxe

were dulled in the deep walls. All night he worked, no sound came to

molest him, and at dawn the last rock swerved and tumbled inwards, and

the river poured in after. Then Alderic took a stone, and went to the

bottom step, and hurled the stone at the door; he heard the echoes

roll into the tower, then he ran back and dived through the hole in

the wall.



He was in the emerald-cellar. There was no light in the lofty vault

above him, but, diving through twenty feet of water, he felt the floor

all rough with emeralds, and open coffers full of them. By a faint ray

of the moon he saw that the water was green with them, and, easily

filling a satchel, he rose again to the surface; and there were the

Gibbelins waist-deep in the water, with torches in their hands! And,

without saying a word, _or even smiling_, they neatly hanged him on

the outer wall--and the tale is one of those that have not a happy

ending.







HOW NUTH WOULD HAVE PRACTISED HIS ART UPON THE GNOLES





Despite the advertisements of rival firms, it is probable that every

tradesman knows that nobody in business at the present time has a

position equal to that of Mr. Nuth. To those outside the magic circle

of business, his name is scarcely known; he does not need to

advertise, he is consummate. He is superior even to modern

competition, and, whatever claims they boast, his rivals know it. His

terms are moderate, so much cash down when the goods are

delivered, so much in blackmail afterwards. He consults your

convenience. His skill may be counted upon; I have seen a shadow on a

windy night move more noisily than Nuth, for Nuth is a burglar by

trade. Men have been known to stay in country houses and to send a

dealer afterwards to bargain for a piece of tapestry that they saw

there--some article of furniture, some picture. This is bad taste: but

those whose culture is more elegant invariably send Nuth a night or

two after their visit. He has a way with tapestry; you would scarcely

notice that the edges had been cut. And often when I see some huge,

new house full of old furniture and portraits from other ages, I say

to myself, "These mouldering chairs, these full-length ancestors and

carved mahogany are the produce of the incomparable Nuth."



It may be urged against my use of the word incomparable that in the

burglary business the name of Slith stands paramount and alone; and of

this I am not ignorant; but Slith is a classic, and lived long ago,

and knew nothing at all of modern competition; besides which the

surprising nature of his doom has possibly cast a glamour upon Slith

that exaggerates in our eyes his undoubted merits.



It must not be thought that I am a friend of Nuth's; on the contrary

such politics as I have are on the side of Property; and he needs no

words from me, for his position is almost unique in trade, being among

the very few that do not need to advertise.



At the time that my story begins Nuth lived in a roomy house in

Belgrave Square: in his inimitable way he had made friends with the

caretaker. The place suited Nuth, and, whenever anyone came to inspect

it before purchase, the caretaker used to praise the house in the

words that Nuth had suggested. "If it wasn't for the drains," she

would say, "it's the finest house in London," and when they pounced on

this remark and asked questions about the drains, she would answer

them that the drains also were good, but not so good as the house.

They did not see Nuth when they went over the rooms, but Nuth was

there.



Here in a neat black dress on one spring morning came an old woman

whose bonnet was lined with red, asking for Mr. Nuth; and with her

came her large and awkward son. Mrs. Eggins, the caretaker, glanced up

the street, and then she let them in, and left them to wait in the

drawing-room amongst furniture all mysterious with sheets. For a long

while they waited, and then there was a smell of pipe-tobacco, and

there was Nuth standing quite close to them.



"Lord," said the old woman whose bonnet was lined with red, "you did

make me start." And then she saw by his eyes that that was not the way

to speak to Mr. Nuth.



And at last Nuth spoke, and very nervously the old woman explained

that her son was a likely lad, and had been in business already but

wanted to better himself, and she wanted Mr. Nuth to teach him a

livelihood.



First of all Nuth wanted to see a business reference, and when he was

shown one from a jeweller with whom he happened to be hand-in-glove

the upshot of it was that he agreed to take young Tonker (for this was

the surname of the likely lad) and to make him his apprentice. And the

old woman whose bonnet was lined with red went back to her little

cottage in the country, and every evening said to her old man,

"Tonker, we must fasten the shutters of a night-time, for Tommy's a

burglar now."



The details of the likely lad's apprenticeship I do not propose to

give; for those that are in the business know those details already,

and those that are in other businesses care only for their own, while

men of leisure who have no trade at all would fail to appreciate the

gradual degrees by which Tommy Tonker came first to cross bare boards,

covered with little obstacles in the dark, without making any sound,

and then to go silently up creaky stairs, and then to open doors, and

lastly to climb.



Let it suffice that the business prospered greatly, while glowing

reports of Tommy Tonker's progress were sent from time to time to the

old woman whose bonnet was lined with red in the labourious

handwriting of Nuth. Nuth had given up lessons in writing very early,

for he seemed to have some prejudice against forgery, and therefore

considered writing a waste of time. And then there came the

transaction with Lord Castlenorman at his Surrey residence. Nuth

selected a Saturday night, for it chanced that Saturday was observed

as Sabbath in the family of Lord Castlenorman, and by eleven o'clock

the whole house was quiet. Five minutes before midnight Tommy Tonker,

instructed by Mr. Nuth, who waited outside, came away with one

pocketful of rings and shirt-studs. It was quite a light pocketful,

but the jewellers in Paris could not match it without sending

specially to Africa, so that Lord Castlenorman had to borrow bone

shirt-studs.



Not even rumour whispered the name of Nuth. Were I to say that this

turned his head, there are those to whom the assertion would give

pain, for his associates hold that his astute judgment was unaffected

by circumstance. I will say, therefore, that it spurred his genius to

plan what no burglar had ever planned before. It was nothing less than

to burgle the house of the gnoles. And this that abstemious man

unfolded to Tonker over a cup of tea. Had Tonker not been nearly

insane with pride over their recent transaction, and had he not been

blinded by a veneration for Nuth, he would have--but I cry over spilt

milk. He expostulated respectfully; he said he would rather not go; he

said it was not fair; he allowed himself to argue; and in the end, one

windy October morning with a menace in the air found him and Nuth

drawing near to the dreadful wood.



Nuth, by weighing little emeralds against pieces of common rock, had

ascertained the probable weight of those house-ornaments that the

gnoles are believed to possess in the narrow, lofty house wherein they

have dwelt from of old. They decided to steal two emeralds and to

carry them between them on a cloak; but if they should be too heavy

one must be dropped at once. Nuth warned young Tonker against greed,

and explained that the emeralds were worth less than cheese until they

were safe away from the dreadful wood.



Everything had been planned, and they walked now in silence.



No track led up to the sinister gloom of the trees, either of men or

cattle; not even a poacher had been there snaring elves for over a

hundred years. You did not trespass twice in the dells of the gnoles.

And, apart from the things that were done there, the trees themselves

were a warning, and did not wear the wholesome look of those that we

plant ourselves.



The nearest village was some miles away with the backs of all its

houses turned to the wood, and without one window at all facing in

that direction. They did not speak of it there, and elsewhere it is

unheard of.



Into this wood stepped Nuth and Tommy Tonker. They had no firearms.

Tonker had asked for a pistol, but Nuth replied that the sound of a

shot "would bring everything down on us," and no more was said about

it.



Into the wood they went all day, deeper and deeper. They saw the

skeleton of some early Georgian poacher nailed to a door in an oak

tree; sometimes they saw a fairy scuttle away from them; once Tonker

stepped heavily on a hard, dry stick, after which they both lay still

for twenty minutes. And the sunset flared full of omens through the

tree trunks, and night fell, and they came by fitful starlight, as

Nuth had foreseen, to that lean, high house where the gnoles so

secretly dwelt.



All was so silent by that unvalued house that the faded courage of

Tonker flickered up, but to Nuth's experienced sense it seemed too

silent; and all the while there was that look in the sky that was

worse than a spoken doom, so that Nuth, as is often the case when men

are in doubt, had leisure to fear the worst. Nevertheless he did not

abandon the business, but sent the likely lad with the instruments of

his trade by means of the ladder to the old green casement. And the

moment that Tonker touched the withered boards, the silence that,

though ominous, was earthly, became unearthly like the touch of a

ghoul. And Tonker heard his breath offending against that silence, and

his heart was like mad drums in a night attack, and a string of one of

his sandals went tap on a rung of a ladder, and the leaves of the

forest were mute, and the breeze of the night was still; and Tonker

prayed that a mouse or a mole might make any noise at all, but not a

creature stirred, even Nuth was still. And then and there, while yet

he was undiscovered, the likely lad made up his mind, as he should

have done long before, to leave those colossal emeralds where they

were and have nothing further to do with the lean, high house of the

gnoles, but to quit this sinister wood in the nick of time and retire

from business at once and buy a place in the country. Then he

descended softly and beckoned to Nuth. But the gnoles had watched him

through knavish holes that they bore in trunks of the trees, and the

unearthly silence gave way, as it were with a grace, to the rapid

screams of Tonker as they picked him up from behind--screams that came

faster and faster until they were incoherent. And where they took him

it is not good to ask, and what they did with him I shall not say.



Nuth looked on for a while from the corner of the house with a mild

surprise on his face as he rubbed his chin, for the trick of the holes

in the trees was new to him; then he stole nimbly away through the

dreadful wood.



"And did they catch Nuth?" you ask me, gentle reader.



"Oh, no, my child" (for such a question is childish). "Nobody ever

catches Nuth."







HOW ONE CAME, AS WAS FORETOLD, TO THE CITY OF NEVER





The child that played about the terraces and gardens in sight of the

Surrey hills never knew that it was he that should come to the

Ultimate City, never knew that he should see the Under Pits, the

barbicans and the holy minarets of the mightiest city known. I think

of him now as a child with a little red watering-can going about the

gardens on a summer's day that lit the warm south country, his

imagination delighted with all tales of quite little adventures, and

all the while there was reserved for him that feat at which men

wonder.



Looking in other directions, away from the Surrey hills, through all

his infancy he saw that precipice that, wall above wall and mountain

above mountain, stands at the edge of the World, and in perpetual

twilight alone with the Moon and the Sun holds up the inconceivable

City of Never. To tread its streets he was destined; prophecy knew it.

He had the magic halter, and a worn old rope it was; an old wayfaring

woman had given it to him: it had the power to hold any animal whose

race had never known captivity, such as the unicorn, the hippogriff

Pegasus, dragons and wyverns; but with a lion, giraffe, camel or

horse it was useless.



How often we have seen that City of Never, that marvel of the Nations!

Not when it is night in the World, and we can see no further than the

stars; not when the sun is shining where we dwell, dazzling our eyes;

but when the sun has set on some stormy days, all at once repentant at

evening, and those glittering cliffs reveal themselves which we almost

take to be clouds, and it is twilight with us as it is for ever with

them, then on their gleaming summits we see those golden domes that

overpeer the edges of the World and seem to dance with dignity and

calm in that gentle light of evening that is Wonder's native haunt.

Then does the City of Never, unvisited and afar, look long at her

sister the World.



It had been prophecied that he should come there. They knew it when

the pebbles were being made and before the isles of coral were given

unto the sea. And thus the prophecy came unto fulfilment and passed

into history, and so at length to Oblivion, out of which I drag it as

it goes floating by, into which I shall one day tumble. The

hippogriffs dance before dawn in the upper air; long before sunrise

flashes upon our lawns they go to glitter in light that has not yet

come to the World, and as the dawn works up from the ragged hills and

the stars feel it they go slanting earthwards, till sunlight touches

the tops of the tallest trees, and the hippogriffs alight with a

rattle of quills and fold their wings and gallop and gambol away till

they come to some prosperous, wealthy, detestable town, and they leap

at once from the fields and soar away from the sight of it, pursued by

the horrible smoke of it until they come again to the pure blue air.



He whom prophecy had named from of old to come to the City of Never,

went down one midnight with his magic halter to a lake-side where the

hippogriffs alighted at dawn, for the turf was soft there and they

could gallop far before they came to a town, and there he waited

hidden near their hoofmarks. And the stars paled a little and grew

indistinct; but there was no other sign as yet of the dawn, when there

appeared far up in the deeps of the night two little saffron specks,

then four and five: it was the hippogriffs dancing and twirling around

in the sun. Another flock joined them, there were twelve of them now;

they danced there, flashing their colours back to the sun, they

descended in wide curves slowly; trees down on earth revealed against

the sky, jet-black each delicate twig; a star disappeared from a

cluster, now another; and dawn came on like music, like a new song.

Ducks shot by to the lake from still dark fields of corn, far voices

uttered, a colour grew upon water, and still the hippogriffs gloried

in the light, revelling up in the sky; but when pigeons stirred on the

branches and the first small bird was abroad, and little coots from

the rushes ventured to peer about, then there came down on a sudden

with a thunder of feathers the hippogriffs, and, as they landed from

their celestial heights all bathed with the day's first sunlight, the

man whose destiny it was as from of old to come to the City of Never,

sprang up and caught the last with the magic halter. It plunged, but

could not escape it, for the hippogriffs are of the uncaptured races,

and magic has power over the magical, so the man mounted it, and it

soared again for the heights whence it had come, as a wounded beast

goes home. But when they came to the heights that venturous rider saw

huge and fair to the left of him the destined City of Never, and he

beheld the towers of Lel and Lek, Neerib and Akathooma, and the cliffs

of Toldenarba a-glistening in the twilight like an alabaster statue of

the Evening. Towards them he wrenched the halter, towards Toldenarba

and the Under Pits; the wings of the hippogriff roared as the halter

turned him. Of the Under Pits who shall tell? Their mystery is secret.

It is held by some that they are the sources of night, and that

darkness pours from them at evening upon the world; while others hint

that knowledge of these might undo our civilization.



There watched him ceaselessly from the Under Pits those eyes whose duty

it is; from further within and deeper, the bats that dwell there arose

when they saw the surprise in the eyes; the sentinels on the bulwarks

beheld that stream of bats and lifted up their spears as it were for

war. Nevertheless when they perceived that that war for which they

watched was not now come upon them, they lowered their spears and

suffered him to enter, and he passed whirring through the earthward

gateway. Even so he came, as foretold, to the City of Never perched upon

Toldenarba, and saw late twilight on those pinnacles that know no other

light. All the domes were of copper, but the spires on their summits

were gold. Little steps of onyx ran all this way and that. With cobbled

agates were its streets a glory. Through small square panes of

rose-quartz the citizens looked from their houses. To them as they

looked abroad the World far-off seemed happy. Clad though that city was

in one robe always, in twilight, yet was its beauty worthy of even so

lovely a wonder: city and twilight were both peerless but for each

other. Built of a stone unknown in the world we tread were its bastions,

quarried we know not where, but called by the gnomes _abyx_, it so

flashed back to the twilight its glories, colour for colour, that none

can say of them where their boundary is, and which the eternal twilight,

and which the City of Never; they are the twin-born children, the

fairest daughters of Wonder. Time had been there, but not to work

destruction; he had turned to a fair, pale green the domes that were

made of copper, the rest he had left untouched, even he, the destroyer

of cities, by what bribe I know not averted. Nevertheless they often

wept in Never for change and passing away, mourning catastrophes in

other worlds, and they built temples sometimes to ruined stars that had

fallen flaming down from the Milky Way, giving them worship still when

by us long since forgotten. Other temples they have--who knows to what

divinities?



And he that was destined alone of men to come to the City of Never was

well content to behold it as he trotted down its agate street, with

the wings of his hippogriff furled, seeing at either side of him

marvel on marvel of which even China is ignorant. Then as he neared

the city's further rampart by which no inhabitant stirred, and looked

in a direction to which no houses faced with any rose-pink windows, he

suddenly saw far-off, dwarfing the mountains, an even greater city.

Whether that city was built upon the twilight or whether it rose from

the coasts of some other world he did not know. He saw it dominate the

City of Never, and strove to reach it; but at this unmeasured home of

unknown colossi the hippogriff shied frantically, and neither the

magic halter nor anything that he did could make the monster face it.

At last, from the City of Never's lonely outskirts where no

inhabitants walked, the rider turned slowly earthward. He knew now why

all the windows faced this way--the denizens of the twilight gazed at

the world and not at a greater than them. Then from the last step of

the earthward stairway, like lead past the Under Pits and down the

glittering face of Toldenarba, down from the overshadowed glories of

the gold-tipped City of Never and out of perpetual twilight, swooped

the man on his winged monster: the wind that slept at the time leaped

up like a dog at their onrush, it uttered a cry and ran past them.

Down on the World it was morning; night was roaming away with his

cloak trailed behind him, white mists turned over and over as he went,

the orb was grey but it glittered, lights blinked surprisingly in

early windows, forth over wet, dim fields went cows from their houses:

even in this hour touched the fields again the feet of the hippogriff.

And the moment that the man dismounted and took off his magic halter

the hippogriff flew slanting away with a whirr, going back to some

airy dancing-place of his people.



And he that surmounted glittering Toldenarba and came alone of men to

the City of Never has his name and his fame among nations; but he and

the people of that twilit city well know two things unguessed by other

men, they that there is another city fairer than theirs, and he--a

deed unaccomplished.







THE CORONATION OF MR. THOMAS SHAP





It was the occupation of Mr. Thomas Shap to persuade customers that

the goods were genuine and of an excellent quality, and that as

regards the price their unspoken will was consulted. And in order to

carry on this occupation he went by train very early every morning

some few miles nearer to the City from the suburb in which he slept.

This was the use to which he put his life.



From the moment when he first perceived (not as one reads a thing in a

book, but as truths are revealed to one's instinct) the very

beastliness of his occupation, and of the house that he slept in, its

shape, make and pretensions, and even of the clothes that he wore; from

that moment he withdrew his dreams from it, his fancies, his

ambitions, everything in fact except that ponderable Mr. Shap that

dressed in a frock-coat, bought tickets and handled money and could in

turn be handled by the statistician. The priest's share in Mr. Shap,

the share of the poet, never caught the early train to the City at

all.



He used to take little flights of fancy at first, dwelt all day in his

dreamy way on fields and rivers lying in the sunlight where it strikes

the world more brilliantly further South. And then he began to imagine

butterflies there; after that, silken people and the temples they

built to their gods.



They noticed that he was silent, and even absent at times, but they

found no fault with his behaviour with customers, to whom he remained

as plausible as of old. So he dreamed for a year, and his fancy gained

strength as he dreamed. He still read halfpenny papers in the train,

still discussed the passing day's ephemeral topic, still voted at

elections, though he no longer did these things with the whole

Shap--his soul was no longer in them.



He had had a pleasant year, his imagination was all new to him still,

and it had often discovered beautiful things away where it went,

southeast at the edge of the twilight. And he had a matter-of-fact and

logical mind, so that he often said, "Why should I pay my twopence at

the electric theatre when I can see all sorts of things quite easily

without?" Whatever he did was logical before anything else, and those

that knew him always spoke of Shap as "a sound, sane, level-headed

man."



On far the most important day of his life he went as usual to town by

the early train to sell plausible articles to customers, while the

spiritual Shap roamed off to fanciful lands. As he walked from the

station, dreamy but wide awake, it suddenly struck him that the real

Shap was not the one walking to Business in black and ugly clothes,

but he who roamed along a jungle's edge near the ramparts of an old

and Eastern city that rose up sheer from the sand, and against which

the desert lapped with one eternal wave. He used to fancy the name of

that city was Larkar. "After all, the fancy is as real as the body,"

he said with perfect logic. It was a dangerous theory.



For that other life that he led he realized, as in Business, the

importance and value of method. He did not let his fancy roam too far

until it perfectly knew its first surroundings. Particularly he

avoided the jungle--he was not afraid to meet a tiger there (after all

it was not real), but stranger things might crouch there. Slowly he

built up Larkar: rampart by rampart, towers for archers, gateway of

brass, and all. And then one day he argued, and quite rightly, that

all the silk-clad people in its streets, their camels, their wares

that came from Inkustahn, the city itself, were all the things of his

will--and then he made himself King. He smiled after that when people

did not raise their hats to him in the street, as he walked from the

station to Business; but he was sufficiently practical to recognize

that it was better not to talk of this to those that only knew him as

Mr. Shap.



Now that he was King in the city of Larkar and in all the desert that

lay to the East and North he sent his fancy to wander further afield.

He took the regiments of his camel-guards and went jingling out of

Larkar, with little silver bells under the camels' chins, and came to

other cities far-off on the yellow sand, with clear white walls and

towers, uplifting themselves in the sun. Through their gates he passed

with his three silken regiments, the light-blue regiment of the

camel-guards being upon his right and the green regiment riding at his

left, the lilac regiment going on before. When he had gone through the

streets of any city and observed the ways of its people, and had seen

the way that the sunlight struck its towers, he would proclaim himself

King there, and then ride on in fancy. So he passed from city to city

and from land to land. Clear-sighted though Mr. Shap was, I think he

overlooked the lust of aggrandizement to which kings have so often

been victims; and so it was that when the first few cities had opened

their gleaming gates and he saw peoples prostrate before his camel,

and spearmen cheering along countless balconies, and priests come out

to do him reverence, he that had never had even the lowliest authority

in the familiar world became unwisely insatiate. He let his fancy ride

at inordinate speed, he forsook method, scarce was he king of a land

but he yearned to extend his borders; so he journeyed deeper and

deeper into the wholly unknown. The concentration that he gave to this

inordinate progress through countries of which history is ignorant and

cities so fantastic in their bulwarks that, though their inhabitants

were human, yet the foe that they feared seemed something less or

more; the amazement with which he beheld gates and towers unknown even

to art, and furtive people thronging intricate ways to acclaim him as

their sovereign--all these things began to affect his capacity for

Business. He knew as well as any that his fancy could not rule these

beautiful lands unless that other Shap, however unimportant, were well

sheltered and fed: and shelter and food meant money, and money,

Business. His was more like the mistake of some gambler with cunning

schemes who overlooks human greed. One day his fancy, riding in the

morning, came to a city gorgeous as the sunrise, in whose opalescent

wall were gates of gold, so huge that a river poured between the bars,

floating in, when the gates were opened, large galleons under sail.

Thence there came dancing out a company with instruments, and made a

melody all around the wall; that morning Mr. Shap, the bodily Shap in

London, forgot the train to town.



Until a year ago he had never imagined at all; it is not to be

wondered at that all these things now newly seen by his fancy should

play tricks at first with the memory of even so sane a man. He gave up

reading the papers altogether, he lost all interest in politics, he

cared less and less for things that were going on around him. This

unfortunate missing of the morning train even occurred again, and the

firm spoke to him severely about it. But he had his consolation. Were

not Arathrion and Argun Zeerith and all the level coasts of Oora his?

And even as the firm found fault with him his fancy watched the yaks

on weary journeys, slow specks against the snow-fields, bringing

tribute; and saw the green eyes of the mountain men who had looked at

him strangely in the city of Nith when he had entered it by the desert

door. Yet his logic did not forsake him; he knew well that his strange

subjects did not exist, but he was prouder of having created them with

his brain, than merely of ruling them only; thus in his pride he felt

himself something more great than a king, he did not dare to think

what! He went into the temple of the city of Zorra and stood some time

there alone: all the priests kneeled to him when he came away.



He cared less and less for the things we care about, for the affairs

of Shap, the business-man in London. He began to despise the man with

a royal contempt.



One day when he sat in Sowla, the city of the Thuls, throned on one

amethyst, he decided, and it was proclaimed on the moment by silver

trumpets all along the land, that he would be crowned as king over all

the lands of Wonder.



By that old temple where the Thuls were worshipped, year in, year out,

for over a thousand years, they pitched pavilions in the open air. The

trees that blew there threw out radiant scents unknown in any countries

that know the map; the stars blazed fiercely for that famous occasion. A

fountain hurled up, clattering, ceaselessly into the air armfuls on

armfuls of diamonds. A deep hush waited for the golden trumpets, the

holy coronation night was come. At the top of those old, worn steps,

going down we know not whither, stood the king in the emerald-and-amethyst

cloak, the ancient garb of the Thuls; beside him lay that Sphinx that

for the last few weeks had advised him in his affairs.



Slowly, with music when the trumpets sounded, came up towards him from

we know not where, one-hundred-and-twenty archbishops, twenty angels

and two archangels, with that terrific crown, the diadem of the Thuls.

They knew as they came up to him that promotion awaited them all

because of this night's work. Silent, majestic, the king awaited them.



The doctors downstairs were sitting over their supper, the warders

softly slipped from room to room, and when in that cosy dormitory of

Hanwell they saw the king still standing erect and royal, his face

resolute, they came up to him and addressed him:



"Go to bed," they said--"pretty bed." So he lay down and soon was fast

asleep: the great day was over.







CHU-BU AND SHEEMISH





It was the custom on Tuesdays in the temple of Chu-bu for the priests

to enter at evening and chant, "There is none but Chu-bu."



And all the people rejoiced and cried out, "There is none but Chu-bu."

And honey was offered to Chu-bu, and maize and fat. Thus was he

magnified.



Chu-bu was an idol of some antiquity, as may be seen from the colour

of the wood. He had been carved out of mahogany, and after he was

carved he had been polished. Then they had set him up on the diorite

pedestal with the brazier in front of it for burning spices and the

flat gold plates for fat. Thus they worshipped Chu-bu.



He must have been there for over a hundred years when one day the

priests came in with another idol into the temple of Chu-bu, and set it

up on a pedestal near Chu-bu's and sang, "There is also Sheemish."



And all the people rejoiced and cried out, "There is also Sheemish."



Sheemish was palpably a modern idol, and although the wood was stained

with a dark-red dye, you could see that he had only just been carved.

And honey was offered to Sheemish as well as Chu-bu, and also maize

and fat.



The fury of Chu-bu knew no time-limit: he was furious all that night,

and next day he was furious still. The situation called for immediate

miracles. To devastate the city with a pestilence and kill all his

priests was scarcely within his power, therefore he wisely

concentrated such divine powers as he had in commanding a little

earthquake. "Thus," thought Chu-bu, "will I reassert myself as the

only god, and men shall spit upon Sheemish."



Chu-bu willed it and willed it and still no earthquake came, when

suddenly he was aware that the hated Sheemish was daring to attempt a

miracle too. He ceased to busy himself about the earthquake and

listened, or shall I say felt, for what Sheemish was thinking; for

gods are aware of what passes in the mind by a sense that is other

than any of our five. Sheemish was trying to make an earthquake too.



The new god's motive was probably to assert himself. I doubt if Chu-bu

understood or cared for his motive; it was sufficient for an idol

already aflame with jealousy that his detestable rival was on the

verge of a miracle. All the power of Chu-bu veered round at once and

set dead against an earthquake, even a little one. It was thus in the

temple of Chu-bu for some time, and then no earthquake came.



To be a god and to fail to achieve a miracle is a despairing

sensation; it is as though among men one should determine upon a

hearty sneeze and as though no sneeze should come; it is as though one

should try to swim in heavy boots or remember a name that is utterly

forgotten: all these pains were Sheemish's.



And upon Tuesday the priests came in, and the people, and they did

worship Chu-bu and offered fat to him, saying, "O Chu-bu who made

everything," and then the priests sang, "There is also Sheemish"; and

Chu-bu was put to shame and spake not for three days.



Now there were holy birds in the temple of Chu-bu, and when the third

day was come and the night thereof, it was as it were revealed to the

mind of Chu-bu, that there was dirt upon the head of Sheemish.



And Chu-bu spake unto Sheemish as speak the gods, moving no lips nor

yet disturbing the silence, saying, "There is dirt upon thy head, O

Sheemish." All night long he muttered again and again, "there is dirt

upon Sheemish's head." And when it was dawn and voices were heard far

off, Chu-bu became exultant with Earth's awakening things, and cried

out till the sun was high, "Dirt, dirt, dirt, upon the head of

Sheemish," and at noon he said, "So Sheemish would be a god." Thus was

Sheemish confounded.



And with Tuesday one came and washed his head with rose-water, and he

was worshipped again when they sang "There is also Sheemish." And yet

was Chu-bu content, for he said, "The head of Sheemish has been

defiled," and again, "His head was defiled, it is enough." And one

evening lo! there was dirt on the head of Chu-bu also, and the thing

was perceived of Sheemish.



It is not with the gods as it is with men. We are angry one with

another and turn from our anger again, but the wrath of the gods is

enduring. Chu-bu remembered and Sheemish did not forget. They spake as

we do not speak, in silence yet heard of each other, nor were their

thoughts as our thoughts. We should not judge them merely by human

standards. All night long they spake and all night said these words

only: "Dirty Chu-bu," "Dirty Sheemish." "Dirty Chu-bu," "Dirty

Sheemish," all night long. Their wrath had not tired at dawn, and

neither had wearied of his accusation. And gradually Chu-bu came to

realize that he was nothing more than the equal of Sheemish. All gods

are jealous, but this equality with the upstart Sheemish, a thing of

painted wood a hundred years newer than Chu-bu, and this worship given

to Sheemish in Chu-bu's own temple, were particularly bitter. Chu-bu

was jealous even for a god; and when Tuesday came again, the third day

of Sheemish's worship, Chu-bu could bear it no longer. He felt that

his anger must be revealed at all costs, and he returned with all the

vehemence of his will to achieving a little earthquake. The

worshippers had just gone from his temple when Chu-bu settled his will

to attain this miracle. Now and then his meditations were disturbed by

that now familiar dictum, "Dirty Chu-bu," but Chu-bu willed

ferociously, not even stopping to say what he longed to say and had

already said nine hundred times, and presently even these

interruptions ceased.



They ceased because Sheemish had returned to a project that he had

never definitely abandoned, the desire to assert himself and exalt

himself over Chu-bu by performing a miracle, and the district being

volcanic he had chosen a little earthquake as the miracle most easily

accomplished by a small god.



Now an earthquake that is commanded by two gods has double the chance

of fulfilment than when it is willed by one, and an incalculably

greater chance than when two gods are pulling different ways; as, to

take the case of older and greater gods, when the sun and the moon

pull in the same direction we have the biggest tides.



Chu-bu knew nothing of the theory of tides, and was too much occupied

with his miracle to notice what Sheemish was doing. And suddenly the

miracle was an accomplished thing.



It was a very local earthquake, for there are other gods than Chu-bu

or even Sheemish, and it was only a little one as the gods had willed,

but it loosened some monoliths in a colonnade that supported one side

of the temple and the whole of one wall fell in, and the low huts of

the people of that city were shaken a little and some of their doors

were jammed so that they would not open; it was enough, and for a

moment it seemed that it was all; neither Chu-bu nor Sheemish

commanded there should be more, but they had set in motion an old law

older than Chu-bu, the law of gravity that that colonnade had held

back for a hundred years, and the temple of Chu-bu quivered and then

stood still, swayed once and was overthrown, on the heads of Chu-bu

and Sheemish.



No one rebuilt it, for nobody dared to near such terrible gods. Some

said that Chu-bu wrought the miracle, but some said Sheemish, and

thereof schism was born. The weakly amiable, alarmed by the bitterness

of rival sects, sought compromise and said that both had wrought it,

but no one guessed the truth that the thing was done in rivalry.



And a saying arose, and both sects held this belief in common, that

whoso toucheth Chu-bu shall die or whoso looketh upon Sheemish.



That is how Chu-bu came into my possession when I travelled once

beyond the hills of Ting. I found him in the fallen temple of Chu-bu

with his hands and toes sticking up out of the rubbish, lying upon his

back, and in that attitude just as I found him I keep him to this day

on my mantlepiece, as he is less liable to be upset that way. Sheemish

was broken, so I left him where he was.



And there is something so helpless about Chu-bu with his fat hands

stuck up in the air that sometimes I am moved out of compassion to bow

down to him and pray, saying, "O Chu-bu, thou that made everything,

help thy servant."



Chu-bu cannot do much, though once I am sure that at a game of bridge

he sent me the ace of trumps after I had not held a card worth having

for the whole of the evening. And chance alone could have done as much

as that for me. But I do not tell this to Chu-bu.







THE WONDERFUL WINDOW





The old man in the Oriental-looking robe was being moved on by the

police, and it was this that attracted to him and the parcel under his

arm the attention of Mr. Sladden, whose livelihood was earned in the

emporium of Messrs. Mergin and Chater, that is to say in their

establishment.



Mr. Sladden had the reputation of being the silliest young man in

Business; a touch of romance--a mere suggestion of it--would send his

eyes gazing away as though the walls of the emporium were of gossamer

and London itself a myth, instead of attending to customers.



Merely the fact that the dirty piece of paper that wrapped the old

man's parcel was covered with Arabic writing was enough to give Mr.

Sladden the idea of romance, and he followed until the little crowd

fell off and the stranger stopped by the kerb and unwrapped his parcel

and prepared to sell the thing that was inside it. It was a little

window in old wood with small panes set in lead; it was not much more

than a foot in breadth and was under two feet long. Mr. Sladden had

never before seen a window sold in the street, so he asked the price

of it.



"Its price is all you possess," said the old man.



"Where did you get it?" said Mr. Sladden, for it was a strange window.



"I gave all that I possessed for it in the streets of Baghdad."



"Did you possess much?" said Mr. Sladden.



"I had all that I wanted," he said, "except this window."



"It must be a good window," said the young man.



"It is a magical window," said the old one.



"I have only ten shillings on me, but I have fifteen-and-six at home."



The old man thought for a while.



"Then twenty-five-and-sixpence is the price of the window," he said.



It was only when the bargain was completed and the ten shillings paid

and the strange old man was coming for his fifteen-and-six and to fit

the magical window into his only room that it occurred to Mr.

Sladden's mind that he did not want a window. And then they were at

the door of the house in which he rented a room, and it seemed too

late to explain.



The stranger demanded privacy when he fitted up the window, so Mr.

Sladden remained outside the door at the top of a little flight of

creaky stairs. He heard no sound of hammering.



And presently the strange old man came out with his faded yellow robe

and his great beard, and his eyes on far-off places. "It is finished,"

he said, and he and the young man parted. And whether he remained a

spot of colour and an anachronism in London, or whether he ever came

again to Baghdad, and what dark hands kept on the circulation of his

twenty-five-and-six, Mr. Sladden never knew.



Mr. Sladden entered the bare-boarded room in which he slept and spent

all his indoor hours between closing-time and the hour at which

Messrs. Mergin and Chater commenced. To the Penates of so dingy a room

his neat frock-coat must have been a continual wonder. Mr. Sladden

took it off and folded it carefully; and there was the old man's

window rather high up in the wall. There had been no window in that

wall hitherto, nor any ornament at all but a small cupboard, so when

Mr. Sladden had put his frock-coat safely away he glanced through his

new window. It was where his cupboard had been in which he kept his

tea-things: they were all standing on the table now. When Mr. Sladden

glanced through his new window it was late in a summer's evening; the

butterflies some while ago would have closed their wings, though the

bat would scarcely yet be drifting abroad--but this was in London: the

shops were shut and street-lamps not yet lighted.



Mr. Sladden rubbed his eyes, then rubbed the window, and still he saw

a sky of blazing blue, and far, far down beneath him, so that no sound

came up from it or smoke of chimneys, a mediaeval city set with

towers; brown roofs and cobbled streets, and then white walls and

buttresses, and beyond them bright green fields and tiny streams. On

the towers archers lolled, and along the walls were pikemen, and now

and then a wagon went down some old-world street and lumbered through

the gateway and out to the country, and now and then a wagon drew up

to the city from the mist that was rolling with evening over the

fields. Sometimes folks put their heads out of lattice windows,

sometimes some idle troubadour seemed to sing, and nobody hurried or

troubled about anything. Airy and dizzy though the distance was, for

Mr. Sladden seemed higher above the city than any cathedral gargoyle,

yet one clear detail he obtained as a clue: the banners floating from

every tower over the idle archers had little golden dragons all over a

pure white field.



He heard motor-buses roar by his other window, he heard the newsboys

howling.



Mr. Sladden grew dreamier than ever after that on the premises, in the

establishment of Messrs. Mergin and Chater. But in one matter he was

wise and wakeful: he made continuous and careful inquiries about the

golden dragons on a white flag, and talked to no one of his wonderful

window. He came to know the flags of every king in Europe, he even

dabbled in history, he made inquiries at shops that understood

heraldry, but nowhere could he learn any trace of little dragons _or_

on a field _argent_. And when it seemed that for him alone those

golden dragons had fluttered he came to love them as an exile in some

desert might love the lilies of his home or as a sick man might love

swallows when he cannot easily live to another spring.



As soon as Messrs. Mergin and Chater closed, Mr. Sladden used to go

back to his dingy room and gaze though the wonderful window until it

grew dark in the city and the guard would go with a lantern round the

ramparts and the night came up like velvet, full of strange stars.

Another clue he tried to obtain one night by jotting down the shapes

of the constellations, but this led him no further, for they were

unlike any that shone upon either hemisphere.



Each day as soon as he woke he went first to the wonderful window, and

there was the city, diminutive in the distance, all shining in the

morning, and the golden dragons dancing in the sun, and the archers

stretching themselves or swinging their arms on the tops of the windy

towers. The window would not open, so that he never heard the songs

that the troubadours sang down there beneath the gilded balconies; he

did not even hear the belfries' chimes, though he saw the jack-daws

routed every hour from their homes. And the first thing that he always

did was to cast his eye round all the little towers that rose up from

the ramparts to see that the little golden dragons were flying there

on their flags. And when he saw them flaunting themselves on white

folds from every tower against the marvelous deep blue of the sky he

dressed contentedly, and, taking one last look, went off to his work

with a glory in his mind. It would have been difficult for the

customers of Messrs. Mergin and Chater to guess the precise ambition

of Mr. Sladden as he walked before them in his neat frock-coat: it was

that he might be a man-at-arms or an archer in order to fight for the

little golden dragons that flew on a white flag for an unknown king in

an inaccessible city. At first Mr. Sladden used to walk round and

round the mean street that he lived in, but he gained no clue from

that; and soon he noticed that quite different winds blew below his

wonderful window from those that blew on the other side of the house.



In August the evenings began to grow shorter: this was the very remark

that the other employees made to him at the emporium, so that he

almost feared that they suspected his secret, and he had much less

time for the wonderful window, for lights were few down there and they

blinked out early.



One morning late in August, just before he went to Business, Mr.

Sladden saw a company of pikemen running down the cobbled road towards

the gateway of the mediaeval city--Golden Dragon City he used to call

it alone in his own mind, but he never spoke of it to anyone. The next

thing that he noticed was that the archers were handling round bundles

of arrows in addition to the quivers which they wore. Heads were

thrust out of windows more than usual, a woman ran out and called some

children indoors, a knight rode down the street, and then more pikemen

appeared along the walls, and all the jack-daws were in the air. In

the street no troubadour sang. Mr. Sladden took one look along the

towers to see that the flags were flying, and all the golden dragons

were streaming in the wind. Then he had to go to Business. He took a

bus back that evening and ran upstairs. Nothing seemed to be happening

in Golden Dragon City except a crowd in the cobbled street that led

down to the gateway; the archers seemed to be reclining as usual

lazily in their towers, and then a white flag went down with all its

golden dragons; he did not see at first that all the archers were

dead. The crowd was pouring towards him, towards the precipitous wall

from which he looked; men with a white flag covered with golden

dragons were moving backwards slowly, men with another flag were

pressing them, a flag on which there was one huge red bear. Another

banner went down upon a tower. Then he saw it all: the golden dragons

were being beaten--his little golden dragons. The men of the bear were

coming under the window; what ever he threw from that height would

fall with terrific force: fire-irons, coal, his clock, whatever he

had--he would fight for his little golden dragons yet. A flame broke

out from one of the towers and licked the feet of a reclining archer;

he did not stir. And now the alien standard was out of sight directly

underneath. Mr. Sladden broke the panes of the wonderful window and

wrenched away with a poker the lead that held them. Just as the glass

broke he saw a banner covered with golden dragons fluttering still,

and then as he drew back to hurl the poker there came to him the scent

of mysterious spices, and there was nothing there, not even the

daylight, for behind the fragments of the wonderful window was nothing

but that small cupboard in which he kept his tea-things.



And though Mr. Sladden is older now and knows more of the world, and

even has a Business of his own, he has never been able to buy such

another window, and has not ever since, either from books or men,

heard any rumour at all of Golden Dragon City.







EPILOGUE





Here the fourteenth Episode of the Book of Wonder endeth and here the

relating of the Chronicles of Little Adventures at the Edge of the

World. I take farewell of my readers. But it may be we shall even meet

again, for it is still to be told how the gnomes robbed the fairies,

and of the vengeance that the fairies took, and how even the gods

themselves were troubled thereby in their sleep; and how the King of

Ool insulted the troubadours, thinking himself safe among his scores

of archers and hundreds of halberdiers, and how the troubadours stole

to his towers by night, and under his battlements by the light of the

moon made that king ridiculous for ever in song. But for this I must

first return to the Edge of the World. Behold, the caravans start.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF WONDER ***